Melton2019s Halo-Halo 2013 Best Halo-Halo, Melton2019s Halo-Halo 2013 Best Halo-HaloMADE famous through word-of-mouth, Melton2019s special halohalo is a delightful concoction of thinly-shaved ice and slices of red banana, coconut, langka and ube, and topped with two scoops of ice cream.
It currently has branches in Poblacion, Pardo and Salvador Ext.
in Labangon.


Mama: Forever Be Loved, Mama: Forever Be LovedOne thing that became clear to me is that the image of a divine mother.
A mother whose beauty transcends her appearance and the values she believed in; her capability to sacrifice for her children2019s sake and being so strong even as if all the world2019s against her modest desires.
This is the image of my mother whom I appreciate the most.

Going down memory lane, I didn2019t have a perfect childhood, and neither did my family.
I have only a few moments with my father since he is a seaman we seldom see him in a year.
My mother is the one who is always with me and my siblings; she took care of us and provided us with the things we need.
When my mother and father separated it was when our world turned drastically around.
My father left us with no support.
Amid that very tough time, my mama chose to be strong for us; she held us in her loving arms and bravely accepted the challenge of rearing us as a single mother.\xa0

As a young child then, I cannot fully comprehend how my mama dealt with everything that has happened to us.
I know it was hard and afflictive for us but mama showed us that there2019s no way for us to give up in life, hence she taught us some significant life lessons as we endure daily challenges.\xa0

THE VALUE OF KINDNESS

Mama and I go out for a night walk; sometimes we wander around downtown to buy something at the convenience store or just some items sold along street sides.
One time, we saw a meager old woman who lives on her own in a street corner with her scanty things, she sells some vegetables and lemons and every time we pass by her area Mama buys her goods, every time she did that I noticed that my mama buys her goods not because we badly needed those but with the aim to help that old woman in her deplorable living condition.\xa0

Like those moments, I will never forget how mama exemplified the value of kindness and concern for others.
Even with our neighbors and her friends she shares what she could.
She tells us that being kind is one of the best ways of building a good relationship with other people.\xa0

STAYING GROUNDED

Young as I am, I have big dreams for my mama and siblings.
Whenever I and my sisters as well share our plans and ambitions in the future on our random conversations we just let the stream of ideas flow and enjoy imagining everything and making it all happen on our minds.
Then we end up with determined hearts that someday we will achieve all our dreams as we let the good times roll.\xa0
It2019s a fun time to talk serious matters though.
And as mama hears our hearts out, she beams with hope and reminds us that whatever success we attain in life and wherever our ambitions take us we must keep in mind that we should be humble; have that sense of gratitude to those people who helped us along our way and never forget to stay grounded.\xa0

BE STRONGER

I was a sickly child before; mama even recalled when I was in a critical state due to pneumonia in my early age.
My sisters as well have been ailing when they were young.
With this, my mother is very careful and meticulous about the food that we eat, the vitamins we take and even the clothes we wear.
She ensured that as we grow we are good and sound holistically.\xa0

Now that I am a yuppie and my sisters are all grown-up ladies, our mother continues to make everything go well.
She attends to our needs even on those petty concerns; the solution is in her hands.
Whenever problems come our way we are reminded by how mama dealt with the problems she encountered in her life and on how strong she faced it all.
She wants for us now to be stronger in faith and in conquering life2019s trials.\xa0

***

Our mothers give us so many gifts.
They give us the precious gift of life, of course, but they also leave treasured lessons that can guide us on our journeys even when they are no longer with us.

To our ever-lovely Mama Ging-Ging, Happy 50th Birthday! We will ever be grateful for everything you did for us.
For being our valiant rock and fortress, our hearts remain in you.
You will always be remembered.
2018Til we meet again! We Love You Forever Mama!\xa0

Loving you always, Ken Lloyd, Kimberly and Krystel F.
Briones

Parkmall 2013 Best Pet-friendly Mall, Parkmall 2013 Best Pet-friendly MallPETS love shopping too, especially when going to Parkmall.
It has pet shops and veterinary clinics, plus an expanse of open space perfect for pets2019 leisurely strolls.

Ayala Center Cebu 2013 Best Lifestyle Mall, Ayala Center Cebu 2013 Best Lifestyle MallAFTER the opening of its expansion wing late last year, Ayala Center Cebu has claimed the spot as Cebu2019s premiere lifestyle destination.

Metro Department Stores 2013 Best Department Store, Metro Department Stores 2013 Best Department StoreAnything and everything can be found in Metro Department Stores.
It carries a line of high quality products in clothes, shoes, toys, appliances, housewares, home decor, furniture and many more to cater to the needs of different shoppers.

The bright interiors and good layout of shelves make shopping a more fulfilling experience.

With branches in Colon, Mandaue and Ayala Center, 416-8999, metro.com.ph.

Rustan2019s Fresh 2013 Best Gourmet Supermarket | Best of Cebu, Rustan2019s Fresh 2013 Best Gourmet Supermarket | Best of CebuRustan2019s Fresh is a connoisseur2019s dream come true.
Hard-to-find sauces and pasta mixes are typically found on their shelves, alongside a wide selection of grocery items from only the finest local and international brands.

Notable items include Waitrose products from Great Britain, Casino products from France, an assortment of Japanese and Korean goods, and imported dairy and deli products that are flown-in every two weeks.

Liga Bata goes to the barangays, Liga Bata goes to the barangaysTHE Maharlika Sports Development Institute Inc.
 has signed up with the office of the Liga ng mga Barangay chair and City Councilor January N.
Duterte to bring its grassroots futsal development program to all 184 barangays of Davao City, with Sun.Star Davao as its media partner, and the JCI Davaoena Daba-Daba.

The memorandum of agreement was signed by Councilor Duterte and Edgar L.
Te of MSDI, with City Sports Development Officer Butch Ramirez and Sun.Star editor-in-chief Stella Estremera signing as witnesses.

The Liga ng mga Barangay thus commits to convene barangays and assist MSDII in implementing its holistic sports development program for football and futsal.
MSDII has made a name in the past four years in implementing a continuing training-and-development program for players and coaches alike with the expertise of FIFA Match Commissioner and coach David Dwight Pestano, who is MSDII2019s technical diresctor, FIFA assistant coach Merlo S.
Albano, and veteran football coach Noel Presto.

Thus, its sports program is not limited to summer leagues that randomly picks out players, but is more into mentoring.

Before signing up with Liga ng mga Barangay, MSDII with Sun.Star Davao and several other partners ran its Liga Bata Futsal competitions at SM Lanang, it has also set up training programs in some public schools incuding the AL Navarro National High School, and a continuing training for kids at Ladislawa, among many others.

There representing MSDII aside from Te were Peter Philip Lat and coaches Presto and Albano.
Pestano is still in Doha, Qatar for the FIFA Beach Soccer World Cup 2015 AFC Qualifier.

The barangay program officially starts April 6.

Best Nail Spa: Nail Island | Best of Cebu, Best Nail Spa: Nail Island | Best of CebuNail Island, located inside Cabana, provides the ultimate pampering experience for hands and feet to keep them looking neat and fab.

The nail spa offers a selection of treatments such as mani-pedis, hand and foot massages, and even paraffin therapy.

 Best Yoga Studio: YogaHub | Best of Cebu,  Best Yoga Studio: YogaHub | Best of CebuOnly in its second year of operations, YogaHub has set the benchmark of the budding yoga industry in Cebu.
201cWe make yoga more accessible, depending on what the client needs,201d says assistant studio director Bernadette Paca\xf1a, the only instructor in Cebu to have completed a 500-hour teacher2019s training.

201cIt does not matter if you2019re a beginner or an advanced practitioner, we ensure that we are able to meet your level of practice through intelligent sequencing, proper cueing, and safe transitions.201d

Best Florist: Kalidades House of Flowers | Best of Cebu, Best Florist: Kalidades House of Flowers | Best of CebuKalidades House of Flowers keeps up with Cebuanos2019 evolving taste by regularly training in-house florists on contemporary designs and techniques in flower arrangements.

This promises clients that every flower setup that reaches their doorstep is personalized and unique, and at the same time, stylish and sophisticated.

How to flirt without being creepy, How to flirt without being creepyFLIRTING is a common act done among teenagers whether men or women.
But many "flirting strategies" are often sinister, causing fear or unease to the other person.

In a man's perspective, many would say that the first step in flirting with a lady is by making an eye contact.
Personally, I think that is the second.
Here are steps on how to flirt with a woman without being creepy and flippant.

Step 1: Look at her hands and check if she is wearing a ring.
If she is, move on.
Captain, that ship has sailed! But do not sweat it; more ships will come.

Step 2: Now is the time to make an eye contact.
Do not be a creep.
Take a glance and smile.
Once you catch her attention, look into her eyes for the second time, and light up that face.
Delight!

Step 3: Take the first move.
Approach her naturally.
Do not walk like a gangster or a zombie.
Introduce yourself and open up a conversation.
"Hi there!" That's a good start.

Step 4.
Ask her questions.
"How often do you come here?" If she starts talking, offer some compliments.
"You look good in that dress." Do not ever say, "I like your ass." If things work, offer some place to quench thirst -- a strategy to keep the conversation going.
"Would you want some refreshments?" Then move ahead!

Step 5.
As the t\xeate-\xe0-t\xeate is about to end, test your fate.
You may not see her for the second time.
Get your phone out and ask her for her mobile number.
Worse luck, if she says, "No." But still, stay courteous before you exit the stage.
"I understand.
It was nice meeting you, anyway." 

Then offer a business card.
Leave her with a beaming smile.

Flirting is never easy.
Some may refuse to take it.
Always remember though -- it is a skill learnt through practice and interaction with different kinds of people.
Why don't you start practicing now? 

Sun.Star launches online Visita Iglesia, Sun.Star launches online Visita IglesiaTake a tour to seven churches in Cebu City this Holy Week.
, IT'S time to celebrate the Holy Week once again, the time when most Catholic faithful renew their faith as they commemorate the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ.
One of the traditions practiced during this season is the Visita Iglesia, or visit to seven churches on Maunday Thursday.
However, some people cannot do their church visits, prompting Sun.Star, at www.sunstar.com.ph, to create a page where people, especially Cebuanos outside the country, can visit seven churches in Cebu virtually.
The Sun.Star Online Visita Iglesia is available at http://multimedia.sunstar.com.ph/holy-week/.
Featured churches are the Cebu Metropolitan Cathedral, Basilica Minore del Sto.
Nino, Our Lady of Guadalupe Parish Church, Carmelite Monastery, Redemptorist Church, Archdiocesan Shrine of the Our Lady of Lourdes, and the San Nicolas de Tolentino Parish Church.


Sun.Star, in partnership with video firm Needs and Solutions Inc.
and the Cebu Metropolitan Cathedral, will also stream live the Siete Palabras or the reading of the Seven Last Words of Christ on Good Friday, April 3.
The Siete Palabras will be aired live from the Cebu Metropolitan Cathedral starting at 12 noon.
The "Salubong" or "Sugat" in Bisaya, as well as the Easter mass will be aired starting at 4 a.m.
Sunday, April 5, also from the Cebu Metropolitan Cathedral.
Visit www.sunstar.com.ph or http://multimedia.sunstar.com.ph/holy-week/ for details.

Back from the ashes, Back from the ashesStella A.
Estremera, FOR decades, since the 1970s, Luz Kinilaw at Mini-Forest along Quezon Boulevard has been a landmark of sorts as people continue to seek its juicy grilled panga and fresh knilaw.
Now it is in ashes, but the grilling continues.
Maybe it2019s about time, too.
As more chic restaurants came to be while Luz Kinilaw remained as it was, its wooden floors already weathered with age and its entrance bearing the soot from the daily grilling since the 1970s, and yes, the pungent smell of the seawater outside, locals would prefer to just order take-out, but the ambience still managed to bring in hundreds of visitors.
That was until April 1 at around 6:51 p.m.
when fire broke out at the back of the famous restaurant and burned down 57 structures, including Luz Kinilaw, and damaged seven other houses.
The fire affected 64 owners, 37 renters, and 75 boarded, and injured two residents.
The fire, however, brought greater panic than the damage it actually caused because nearly a year ago, on April 4, 2014, a fire broke out in neighboring Isla Verde and went on to raze houses and establishments in three adjacent barangays --  23-C, 21-C, and 22-C 2013 in an 8.8 hectare area affecting some 3,500 families.
Yesterday, Black Saturday, just three days since the fire and even as Luz Kinilaw2019s structure is still down, the grilling continues, in an adjacent space that was not affected by fire.
The landmark may have gone, but the kinilaw and the sinugba remains.
Hinuklog: MisOr town's community reenactment on the Passion of Christ, Hinuklog: MisOr town's community reenactment on the Passion of ChristFroilan Gallardo, MEDINA, Misamis Oriental 2013 This municipality of 31,154 residents is playing catch up in the world of tourism by dipping into its traditional Lenten play 201cHinuklog,201d a reenactment of the Passion of Christ.
Hundreds of local tourists and residents lined up the streets of this town to watch actors in colorful costumes and good acting performed the Lenten street play last Maundy Thursday and Good Friday.
201cWe hoped the theater tradition of this town can spur tourists to visit Medina and watch our Lenten play every Holy Week,201d Medina town Mayor Ken Ni\xf1o Uyguangco said.

Uyguangco said the town of Medina always has the passion for theater starting with their parents and grandparents who acted on variety shows and school plays staged on makeshift stages during the 50s and 60s.
He said student-trainers later came to Medina, trained the local residents and staged the first Lenten passion street play in 1978.
Uyguangco said the Lenten production has become a passion for Medina residents who always look forward to see the street play every Holy week.
Community endeavor
201cWhat is interesting here is that the characters of the passion play are acted by the local community.
It is really a town endeavor,201d he said.
Uyguangco said the role of Jesus Christ was played by trisikad driver Edu Dorimon while other town residents play the major parts of the Lenten Passion play.
Uyguangco said that despite political differences and economic status, the town2019s folk contributed for the success of the 201cHinuklog 201d a Holy Week event.
Artists from the out of school youths, tricycle drivers, students, retirees, government and private employees, among others, took pride of showing their ability as actors and actresses depicting the participation of people during Jesus2019 remaining days.
201cIn this tech-savvy world, it is rare for a whole community or an entire town supporting the production of the play,201d Judy Aclan of the Department of Trade Misamis Oriental said.
2018One town, one product2019
Aclan said DTI is supporting the town2019s dream of bringing in 201ccultural tourists201d under its 201cOne Town-One Product or OTOP201d program.
The more than 200 artists and production staff are members of Lumadnong Magdudula sa Medina  which has been responsible in bringing to the public this OTOP scheme as tourism destination of the province.
She said there are only three places in the Philippines which have been engaged in 201ccultural tourism,201d one of them is Mindoro which stages the yearly Moriones Festival.
Aclan said Medina residents could enjoy the brisk trade that will be spawned by the popularity of  201cHinuklog201d through trinkets makingg, t-shirts and offering their houses to tourists for home stay.
Production cost
Uyguangco said that last year2019s production cost of Hinuklog amounted to P800,000 for logistics.
The money spent came from the local residents, corporate sponsors and donations from Medinanhons who are already residing abroads.
201cThe Hinuklog event is an activity designed to put Medina on the map and showcase the investment potential of the town,201d Uyguangco said.
Nelson Gasatang, overall director of the play, disclosed that the holding of the 201cPasyon ni Kristo201d was stopped in 1991 for lack of logistics.
201cBecause of the potential of the Hinuklog, we decided to form a council to draw its path sans politics,201d Gasatang said.
 
Since its inception the Hinuklog participants underwent theater workshops to better their acting under the National Council of Culture and the Arts .
More than P500,000 was spent for staging Hinuklog this year which has one overall director and five scene directors.
201cHinuklog, a church based activity is free of politics despite the support from the local government.
It has its own council to plan out its future,201d Uyguangco said.
Gasatang said that while they cannot fully deliver what Jesus experienced, but with Hinuklog they can deepen the consciousness of the parishioners with the message that Christ imparted to the faithful.
 
Masbad: Easter visuals, Masbad: Easter visualsRoark L.
Masbad, Wacky Tech, HAPPY Easter everyone! He is risen and it2019s always a good thing to be grateful for everything and anything that has come to us.
I pray for blessings for you and your family in this glorious day!
This week, I2019ll leave with you with three infographics on happiness, climate change and, because it2019s Easter Sunday, a guide on eggs.
One, possibly and hopefully to help you break down things and help you gain more happiness.
Two, to hopefully help you better understand what climate change is.
And three, well, because it2019s Easter Sunday.

Guide to Eggs



Climate Change




Happiness
by balkusm.



Until then!
PWD among top academic achievers of Pantawid in NorMin, PWD among top academic achievers of Pantawid in NorMin
Pantawid Pamilya grantee Edy Rose Tayab  shows her medals and ribbons with her sister.

LIFE has not been easy for 17-year-old Edy Rose T.
Tayab of Purok 17, Barangay Butong, Quezon, Bukidnon.
She was born with a congenital deformity.
She has no feet and left hand.
But Edy Rose did not let her disability get in the way of achieving her dreams.
She wanted to excel in her class, just like her friends.
201cI want to prove myself that I can do what the normal people can do,201d claimed Edy Rose who added she couldn2019t avoid comparing herself to her classmates.
Having no feet, Edy Rose can walk using her underdeveloped lower limbs without crutches daily.
Her residence is about three kilometers away from Apayao National High School, a challenge she had to face just to finish her secondary education.
201cUsahay makamahay ,201d she said, especially when some or her classmates or even adults would taunt her, saying, 201cNganong ing-ana man imong nilaktan? Mohilom nalang ko.
Pero sa akong galamhan gisakitan nako, .201d
Dream comes true 
Edy Rose, who placed top nine at Apayao National High School of Quezon town this year started focusing on her studies even while in her elementary years.
She is a consistent honor pupil.
201cI enjoy studying,201d Edy Rose said, adding that it was during in her elementary years that she noticed she loves Mathematics.
201cIt feels like I2019m just playing games when it comes to Mathematics,201d said Edy Rose.
She added she loves to answer Mathematical challenges.
Finishing at the ninth place is a dream-come-true for Edy Rose, who plans to take business and accountancy related course in college.
Edy Rose, monitored by Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino  of the Department of Social Welfare and Development , expresses her heartfelt gratitude to DSWD and to President Benigno Aquino III.
201cMagpasalamat jud ko sa DSWD ug ni Presidente PNoy kay natabangan ko nila sa pag-eskwela pinaagi sa Pantawid Pamilya aron makab-ot nako ang akong mga pangandoy,201d she said.
.
Before her enrolment in the program, Edy Rose recalled that her family could hardly send her to school.
201cMay adlaw ko nga walay balon sauna.
Karon kompleto nako og balon ug mga gamit sa eskwelahan,201d she said.

Fellow achiever
Edy Rose is not the only Pantawid Pamilya academic achiever in her school.
Via Calibjo is the Class Valedictorian of Apayao National High School.
Calibjo also received academic awards like the Excellence in English, Excellence in Filipino, Excellence in Mathematics, and Excellence in Science.
Pantawid Pamilya is a government2019s poverty-reduction strategy that provides cash grants to extremely poor households aimed at helping them raise educated and healthy children aged 18 years and below.
 
It utilizes the Conditional Cash Transfer  scheme where beneficiaries receive cash grant provided that they send their children to school, get preventive health check-up, and the parents attend the monthly Family Development Session .
Edy Rose and Via are among the more than 20,381 Pantawid Pamilya beneficiaries who graduated this school year 2014-2015.
Currently, Northern Mindanao has 271,077 active household beneficiaries of Pantawid Pamilya.

Hurdling dire poverty to get college diploma, Hurdling dire poverty to get college diploma
Vergil Alon
Riz P.
Sunio, HIS story is no different to others we saw on television or read somewhere, but the courage he and all the others have is worth emulating.

He barely has money in his pocket since birth, but it didn2019t hinder him to earn his college diploma which he believes is the answer to all the difficulties he and his family have been facing through the years.

For him, the diploma is his passport to lifting him up and his family from such dire poverty.
Meet Vergil Alon, a graduating cum laude student of BSEd in Biology of Mindanao State University in Marawi City who hails from Lopez Jaena, Misamis Occidental.

Vergil is a Subanen born in Sindangan, Zamboanga del Norte from a not-so-fortunate family.
He is third among the brood of seven by Cirilo and Maura Alon.

In his younger days, his mother stayed at home and his father worked as a bus driver2019s assistant but later he was fired.
Left unemployed, he opted to sell 201camakan,201d weaved bamboos used as walls for mostly houses made of light materials, to sustain his family2019s daily needs.
At that time, the amakan was sold at P25 per mat.
He only earned once orders were made.
Vergil and his siblings also helped their father in mat making and delivered them to customers.

Younger years
In his elementary years at Juan Bugarin Central School, Vergil said there were times when they couldn2019t go to school because they did not have money for fare.
201cLagi kaming absent kasi walang pera ,201d he recalled.

When he was in Grade 3, his aunt promised him a gift if he earned an honor at school.
He was able to make it to the fourth spot in the class.
His aunt gave him a pack of small wafers.

It was even harder during Grades 4 to 6.

201cNiabot mi sa point na wala mi2019y rice ,201d he said.

Yet, it didn2019t hinder him to come up on stage to get his awards at school wearing the same shoes every recognition for four consecutive years.

Debts were piling up.
Lenders kept on coming to their house trying to squeeze money from his mother who owed them.
201cDi pa na-deliver , utang na naman,201d he shared.

Left with no choice, his mother left their home 2018to look for money,2019 but even Vergil did not know where his mother went.

Without a mother, he and his siblings had to go to the some hinterland areas to pick camote just to have something to eat.

With all these difficulties at hand, he completed his elementary level landing at the fourth spot.

Life had become more difficult, but Vergil treaded on to high school in Sindangan National High School.

Vergil and his brother were attending school, but when life was made more difficult to come by, Vergil2019s brother quit school and instead sent Vergil to school.

When he was in first year high school, his family moved to Zamboanga City to look for greener pastures.
They had to earn because their debts were continuously piling up.

Vergil did not want to stop schooling and decided to be left behind.
Alone, he only ate rice with coconut meat.
201cKato jud and time na , I really felt alone,201d he said.

Treading to college 
No amount of difficulties stopped Vergil because he graduated Valedictorian at Misamis Occidental National High School in Oroquieta City.
He survived high school by staying in an aunt2019s place and even at his teachers just to continue with his high school.
 
His parents despite financial difficulties supported Vergil to continue to college seeing that Vergil2019s success would lift their formidable life situation.

201dMurag nakit-an pud sa akong family na college na jud ang maka-sulbad sa among problema ,201d he said.

Instead of being discouraged to study and pushed to work, his parents gave their full support sans money, thus, he was able to enter the university as an entrance scholar.

He shared that on his way to MSU Marawi, it was his first time to take a barge from Ozamiz to Mukas in Tubod town in Lanao del Norte.

During his first year in college, his family and his aunt helped each other to eke out something to provide for Vergil2019s allowance, yet it was intermittent and put him to hunger.

Still, he persisted and took some work to earn and buy his food.
He did tutorials, laundry for his teachers and even roommates, became an assistant to a pastor, and a student assistant in his college to sustain him in his studies.

201cKapoy, dili na nimo ma-balance na nagalaba na ka while nag-skwela2026Pero accept the fact na lang nga walang-wala ka, na kailangan mo ang trabahong ito to sustain your needs ,201d he said.
Yet, he persevered and involved himself in various extracurricular activities: dance, debate, quiz shows, and in the college publication.
Working, studying, and extracurricular activities2014he juggled all of these in his five years in college.

 201cStudying in a far school is a challenge for you to look for means to survive.
It2019s a test of resourcefulness,201d Vergil proudly said beaming amid complexities of the challenges he has been facing with.

For five years, he washed others2019 clothes with his bare hands.
Now, he holds his hard-earned college diploma, and best graduating with flying colors on April 15.

English Access Summer Camp, English Access Summer CampMORE than 200 students from different schools in South Central Mindanao gathered at the Regional Major Seminary  last week for the English Access Micro Scholarship Program Summer Camp spearheaded by the Kasilak Development Foundation Inc.
.
The summer camp is part of the two-year program design of the scholarship aimed at providing other avenue for the scholars to explore in developing their communication skills.
Each English Access Student Scholar is required to complete at least 180 hours of after-school English classes given by their English teachers and are also required to render certain hours of community service or involvements.
The Access Scholars were chosen based on criteria and guidelines that our Foundation developed in coordination with the US Embassy and the schools.

But primarily, the major consideration in selecting the students are those that are underprivileged and below average students but has the potential in improving their performance in school as well as leadership potential, said Joemil Saloma Montebon, Kasilak Executive Director.
The program is implemented in partnership with the US State Department through the US Embassy-Manila and Dole Philippines Inc.
and Dole-Stanfilco.
Current partner-schools for School Year 2014-15 and SY 2015-16 with 30 scholars per school are: Tagbina National High School in Tagbina, Surigao del Sur , Impasugong National High School in Ipasugong, Bukidnon , Talandang National High School in Tugbok Dsitrict, Davao City and Araibo National High School in Pantukan, Compostela Valley , and Ginatilan National High School in Kidapawan City, North Cotabato, and Kablon National High School in Tupi, South Cotabato .
"We consider managing and implementing the English Access Program as part of our institutional mission in Kasilak in making meaningful contribution in shaping not just the minds and hearts of these young potential student-scholars but also in preparing and equipping them able to face life's challenges -- in their studies, in their respective communities," Montebon says.
The English Access Microscholarship Program  provides a foundation of English language skills to talented 13-20 year-olds from economically disadvantaged sectors through at least 360 hours of after school classes and intensive sessions over two years.
The Access Program also gives participants the opportunity to gain an appreciation for US culture and democratic values, build personal development skills, and participate in community service initiatives through hands-on enhancement activities.
The program is a high profile, public diplomacy initiative that provides participating US embassies an opportunity to tangibly demonstrate our country's dedication to education and mutual understanding.
The Access Program is a US Department of State-sponsored program and is among the Office of English Language Programs2019 suite of core initiatives, reads the pamphlet about the scholarship.
Pinoy Aquaman takes on Ta\xf1on, Pinoy Aquaman takes on Ta\xf1on
Courtesy: Ingemar Macarine's Facebook account
Liberty A.
Pinili, THE Pinoy Aquaman has decided to champion San Remigio2019s beaches and Ta\xf1on Strait.
To campaign for clean beaches and seas, lawyer Ingemar Macarine will swim today at least 17.6 kilometers across the Ta\xf1on Strait, from Sta.
Fe in Bantayan Island to the Lapyahan in San Remigio.

Macarine said the swim is in support of the Municipality of San Remigio2019s tourism development program.

201cI2019m in the best position to promote clean beaches and seas because I am in the sea ,201d he told a press conference yesterday.
  
Macarine, election officer of Tubigon in Bohol, said it is difficult to influence policy makers so he will focus on raising awareness.
201cI hope that my swim would highlight the importance of clean seas and beaches,201d he said.

He said that having clean beaches and seas is not only beneficial to the environment but also to an area2019s tourism, which creates jobs.
Trash
He said he was disappointed to see plenty of trash during his swim from Olango Island to Mactan in July 2014.
 201cThere was a lot of plastic trash in the sea,201d he said.
   
Macarine said he checked the waters yesterday as part of his preparation for today2019s swim.
He did not see garbage in that part of Ta\xf1on Strait, a protected seascape.
He said, though, that the waves and current would pose a challenge.
 The presence of jelly fish that, according to local fisherfolk usually appears during the dry months, will be another challenge.
He said that the nearest distance between San Remigio and Sta.
Fe, Bantayan is 17.6 kilometers but he will most likely swim 3 to 5 kilometers more because of the current and the waves.
He will swim an average of 3 kilometers per hour.
He will wake up at 3 a.m.
and start swimming at 4 a.m.
after a breakfast of three bananas.
His support crew, which includes navigator Edwin dela Cruz and triathlete Roel Catoto, will be on a motorboat.

Macarine said that he hopes to be able to get past Gibitngil Island before 8 a.m.
to avoid swimming against the current.

Protected
Macarine2019s swim is funded by the Municipal Government of San Remigio, which has established more than 230 hectares of marine protected areas.

The local government also has an active Municipal Fisheries and Aquatic Reform Council and Municipal Environment and Natural Resources Office.

Macarine said he picked San Remigio because of the Municipal Government2019s environmental program and location.

As a marathon swimmer, Macarine is always on the lookout for opportunities to swim more than 10 kilometers in open water.
 He is also eyeing Camiguin and Davao.
His next swim will be in Sarangani on May 10 and in the San Francisco Bay  in California, United States.

Since his first long distance swim in 2013, Macarine had five events with distances of more than 10 kilometers.

Macarine2019s training involves swimming in the pool for at least three hours  three times a week.
In between, he runs or go cycling.

He makes sure to get at least eight hours of sleep every day.
He said that he believes he is prepared for the swim across the Ta\xf1on Strait as he is
no longer bothered by pain in his left shoulder.
Macarine said that despite his family2019s fears, he has never encountered a shark.
201cBut during the Visayas-Mindanao swim in May 2014, I swam with melon-headed whales.201d 
Masbad: Quick finds, Masbad: Quick findsRoark L.
Masbad, Wacky Tech, Games Games Games!
Here are 11 ways for a sure-fire way of lowering your productivity.

WEZR
Its Kickstarter page claims it2019s the 201cindustry2019s most precise weather tracker201d.
Unfortunately, it will not be available in the Philippines when it starts.
Hopefully though it actually lives up to its claim by the time it gets here.
 
GoT Leak
And finally, over the weekend, 4 episodes of Game of Thrones2019 5th season got leaked.
I know, it sucks.
If you2019re one of them who has already seen those episodes, don2019t spoil for all others who chose not to pre-empt the series and watch it advance.

Link to the story when you click on the image.




5 things to know about Hillary Clinton's decision to run again, 5 things to know about Hillary Clinton's decision to run again
In this March 22, 2014, file photo, former President Bill Clinton  listens as former secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton speaks during a student conference for the Clinton Global Initiative University at Arizona State University in Tempe, Ariz.

WASHINGTON -- The launch of Hillary Rodham Clinton's 2016 presidential campaign marks the end of a long and methodical decision-making process for the former secretary of state, senator and first lady.
While the Democratic political apparatus had been pushing Clinton to run since the day she left the State Department, she waited until last fall to fully engage in the process.
Once she did, Clinton met with dozens of policy and political experts, pored through countless memos and delved deeply into what went wrong with her failed 2008 campaign.
Here are five things to know about Clinton's decision to run:
1.
As Clinton was returning to private life after her four years in the Obama administration, an outside group called Ready for Hillary was pushing her to run for the White House.
At first, the group was a source of frustration for her advisers, who felt it was putting too much pressure on Clinton far too quickly.
But soon, the Clinton team's view of Ready for Hillary would shift from annoyance to acceptance.
The energy the organization was harnessing reminded them of the kind of grassroots movements they jealously watched mobilize around Barack Obama in 2008.
2.
There was plenty that gave Clinton pause as she started weighing another campaign.
She grimaced at the thought of giving up her privacy again.
She worried about putting daughter Chelsea, her husband Marc and their baby in the spotlight.
She felt bad that her candidacy would crowd out Vice President Joe Biden, a longtime friend who was also toying with a White House run.
Clinton was also mindful of chatter that she could be challenged from her party's liberal left flank.
She set up a meeting with Sen.
Elizabeth Warren, whose anti-Wall Street positions were galvanizing progressives and stoking talk that she could launch her own 2016 campaign.
The meeting was as much an opportunity for Clinton to gauge the mood of progressives as it was a chance to size up the seriousness of Warren's repeated denials of a White House run.
3.Clinton campaigned aggressively for Democrats in the 2014 elections, holding 45 events for 26 candidates.
More than half of those candidates lost.
Clinton had expected the results to be bad, but not this bad.
Democrats had run scared, she concluded.
The party had done little to defend its accomplishments on the economy and health care, and done even less to argue what Democrats wanted to do in the future.
Clinton's takeaways about Democrats' failures would guide the final months of her decision-making about running for president.
4.
Though the fall, Clinton delved into meetings with political and policy experts.
As she navigated what a successful campaign would look like, she consulted several operatives who worked for Obama.
Among them: former Obama campaign manager David Plouffe, ground game guru Jennifer O'Malley Dillon, and digital director Teddy Goff.
Clinton also convened long economic discussions that centered on income inequality and the widening achievement gap.
Foreign policy experts gave her their diagnosis of pressing problems in the Middle East and with Russia.
Clinton took hand-written notes and stockpiled multi-page memos.
5.
By the time Christmas rolled around, Clinton had largely settled on running a second campaign, but wanted to make the final determination with her husband, Bill.
The couple headed to the Dominican Republic for their annual vacation at fashion designer Oscar de la Renta's beachfront estate.
Clinton arrived on the island with 500 pages of campaign notes in tow.
She spent her beach vacation wading through the documents and discussing her plans with her husband.
When she returned to New York in the new year, there was no formal meeting with staff or email to friends to announce her candidacy.
Clinton simply started telling advisers to move forward with hiring and find a campaign headquarters.

7 type of students you meet in college, 7 type of students you meet in collegeRuji Peter S.
Abat, IN SURVIVING the traditional school politics, it takes familiarity of the different people you meet in school.
The Athletes -- They generally are either members of the school varsity team or they are simply hanging out with the varsity team.
Girls are easily attracted to them yet some of them turn out to be class bullies.
But mind you, they are ideal partners when there are physically-strenuous activities that you need to accomplish.
The Mean Girls -- They boast of their good looks and their charisma but as the name would imply, they are also bullies preying on the "less-popular" girls.
For some, their presence serves as inspiration for the so-called "ugly ducklings" who would later turn out as beautiful swans.
They become the trend-setter in fashion and ugly-ducklings could take a pointer or two from these mean girls.
The Brainiacs -- A constant name in the honor roll, these nerds excel on virtually all academic subjects.
Everybody wants to sit near this person during exams.
Braniacs despise their fellow braniacs who are gunning for the top honors.
Some would turn out to be helpful but some are also victims of bullying as they forced to work on bullies' assignments in exchange for their safety.

The Artists -- They either excel in drawing, music or other performing arts.
You often see them making doodles when bored in class while some are the centers of attraction during the recess or lunchtime jam sessions.
Others, meanwhile, are the common faces you see during dance intermission numbers in school events and they usually steal the limelight in role-playing activities in class.
The Gamers -- These people are a different type of nerd.
Whether it is hand-held consoles or PC games, these people can't seem to get their games out of their head that their philosophy in life are anchored on the characters they play.
But they could still be helpful especially in preparing reports and papers since their fast hands in gaming would mean fast encoding.
The Bad Boys/Girls -- They slack off and always complain how sluggish the time is when they are in class.
At some point, they even think that their too cool to be in class so they skip it.
Later on, you'd see them sitting near the brainiacs.
The Class Clown -- It's always a light moment with these people as they know a thing or two on how they could make their classmates and teachers break out in laughter.
The Neutrals -- Their neither cool or weird.
They tend to blend in with different cliques making them very sociable persons.
These types of students that you come across in school provide pros and cons but a healthy dose of equal time spent among all these types of students could easily help you get through the school life.
Davao City: Education is here!, Davao City: Education is here!Reuel John F.
Lumawag, DAVAO City is not only the center for business and economic activity in Mindanao but it is also the center of education in the island, being the home of some of the country's top universities.
The city currently hosts five universities, University of Mindanao , Ateneo de Davao University , University of Immaculate Conception , University of Southeastern Philippines , and University of Mindanao.
Addu and UM have been granted an Autonomous Status from the Commission on Higher Education .
It also hosts more than 30 other tertiary institutions, among them are San Pedro College, Holy Cross of Davao College, Davao Medical School Foundation, and Rizal Memorial Colleges, to name a few.
Davao Association of Catholic Schools  executive director Jimmie-loe P.
Dela Vega said over the years educational institutions in the city have been continually upgrading themselves and maintain their quality in accordance with the minimum standards set by the government regulating agencies.
"Beyond complying with the minimum standards most of the schools here in Davao have also voluntarily subjected themselves to a process that aims for a quality beyond what is being prescribed by the government," he said.
Dela Vega said another distinction that makes Davao City as the center of education in Mindanao is that its universities and colleges offers quality education that can level those of the top universities in the country's urban centers, like Manila and Cebu, at a more affordable price.
"Quality higher education at a more affordable rate," he said.
Davao City's overall environment also gives it an edge when it comes to conduciveness of the city for studying.
"Families feel secure to send their children here.
The quality of life and the environment is relatively better compared to bigger cities," Dela Vega said.
He said Davao City enjoys a dynamic academic community with higher education institutions, whether sectarian or non-sectarian.
"There is a lively academic interaction among learning institutions in different areas like research and sharing of best practices," Dela Vega said.
"These I believe are some of the reasons why the quality of higher education of Davao City is at par with other urban centers," he added.
Free to study, free to play, Free to study, free to playMarianne L.
Saberon-Abalayan, NOT everybody gets to study in college for free as it really is costly to take even a two-year or four-year course.
Thus, gifted students avail of different types of scholarships offered by big colleges or universities.
Most popular of which is the varsity scholarship.
Any student may apply, be scouted or recruited for a varsity scholarship.
Exceptional ones get better benefits.
The University of Mindanao , Emar Human and Environmental College, Rizal Memorial Colleges , Jose Maria College , Agro-Industrial Foundation College of the Philippines , Holy Cross of Davao College, DMMA College of Southern Philippines and Mats College of Technology are among those schools in Davao City that have good varsity scholarship programs.
UM has some 240 varsity scholars in most events catered by the Private Schools Athletic Association , according to sports director Joaquin "Boy" Sarabia.
His assistant Vincent Ryan Sarabia said athletes are categorized as Class A or national-caliber ones and class B are those with achievements in regional meets.
A Class A student-athlete enjoys a full scholarship while a Class B athlete gets 75 percent scholarship but both avail of P150 meal allowance per week for three training days, free rubber shoes and  playing uniforms.

PBA Purefoods Star Hotshots' Peter June Simon and Alaska Aces' Samigue Eman are notable products of UM's varsity scholarship program.
Emar, meanwhile, has at least 200 High School and college varsity scholars.
Emar president Ma.
Lita Montalban said, "They never pay anything - free tuition, free miscellaneous, free meals whether they win or lose in a game and free uniforms.
Even graduation fees are free for them."
Montalban, in an interview, added: "I believe that sports is the best intervention for values formation of students to keep them away from gangs and vices.
Our student-athletes give the best advertisement for the school."
RMC sports coordinator Annie Mana-ay, for her part, said they maintain 45 varsity scholars in men's and women's basketball, football and taekwondo.
Their class A1 "national players" are free in tuition and miscellaneous excluding IDs and insurance while class A "regional players" are also free in tuition but only 50 percent off in miscellaneous.
JMC, according to sports director Mark Alemania, keeps some 70 student-athletes who avail of free tuition, free allowance and free board and lodging for those not from Davao City.
Just like the others, JMC also classifies varsity scholars into A+  or A .
While class A+ are free in tuition and miscellaneous, class A receives free tuition but pays minimal miscellaneous fees.
Transportation allowance  is P150 per week for each athlete.
But what sets JMC apart from the rest, Pastor Apollo C.
Quiboloy treats his champions with all-expense-paid trip abroad.
Alemania said, "We have athletes who were sent to Hong Kong as a gift from Pastor Quiboloy."
It's very interesting to note indeed that student-athletes have to maintain passing grades or specific averages to keep their scholarships.
An upside of being a varsity scholar is being able to study for free and enjoy playing the sport one loves like getting the best of both worlds.

Getting the right course, Getting the right courseKarlo Paolo R.
Pates, CHOOSING a course for college is certainly not an easy undertaking for a new high school graduate to do.
High School graduates should sway from choosing courses because of its popularity but instead consider taking courses in line with the demands of the market.

The Commission on Higher Education  last March 25, 2014 released the official list of in-demand and priority college courses for 2014 until 2018.

According to the list, the most in-demand college courses include agriculture, engineering, science and technology, math, information technology , teacher education and health sciences.
The highest in-demand college course goes to the fields of Agriculture and Engineering with 15% followed by Science and Math at 13%.
Information Technology , Teacher Education and Health Sciences came in third at 10% while Arts and Humanities, Social and Behavioral Sciences, Business Administration, and Architecture settled at the fourth spot with 5%.
Maritime and Communication were last at 2%.
 
Possible courses under the agriculture field are Agro-Forestry, Veterinary Medicine, Agricultural Engineering, Agribusiness/Management, Agricultural Technology, Fisheries, BS Food Technology and Agricultural Economics.
Other available courses under the Engineering field are Mechanical, Electronics, Communication, Metallurgical Mining, Computer, Biomedical, Chemical, Geodetic, Electrical, Meteorological, Mining, Geological, Sanity Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Industrial Engineering, Civil Engineering, Petroleum Engineering and Bio-Chemical Engineering.
Dr.
Judith Dalagan, mass communication program chair and full-time professor at the Ateneo de Davao University , in an interview with Sun.Star Davao at her office recently, shared that incoming students must be able to identify first the career path they want to pursue, saying:"If you don't know the career path you're undertaking then you would not know how can you equip yourself with the right skills?."
"I know a lot of people who have succeeded in their careers because they knew what they want.
But your degree can only be your passport sometime in the real world.
The real world does not have to put you in that box with what your degree can offer," Dr.
Dalagan added.
She, meanwhile, bared that job mismatch has been a trend or reality here in the Philippines, saying:"We offer a lot computer engineering but we don't have computer industry.
We produced a lot of accounting graduates but we only have few big firms for them."
"But the point here is that even if you don't practice your degree as long as you have that sense of fulfillment in what you're doing and at the same time you've helped the society better economically then you made yourself a productive member in society in your own little way," Dr.
Dalagan said.
 
The Department of Labor and Employment , for its part, encouraged the incoming college students to pick courses that would land them jobs after graduation.
Quick Facts: DepEd's K to 12 Program, Quick Facts: DepEd's K to 12 ProgramKriztja Marae G.
Labrador, WITH the K to 12 program set on full implementation next year, here are the top five things that you need to know about it.
Background
The program, according to the Official Gazette, "covers Kindergarten and 12 years of basic education." The additional years aims to provide enough time for "mastery of concepts and skills, develop lifelong learners, and prepare graduates for tertiary education, middle-level skills development, employment, and entrepreneurship."
The implementation of the program is pursuant to the Enhanced Basic Education Act of 2013 signed by President Benigno Aquino III on May 15, 2013.
1.
K to 12 is being implemented gradually
The Department of Education  began the implementation of universal Kindergarten in school year  2011-2012, new curriculum for grade one and grade seven was rolled out in SY 2012-2013, and new curriculum for grade two and grade eight was rolled out in SY 2013-2014.
Grade 11 is set to be introduced next SY, 2016-2017, and grade 12 in SY 2017-2018.
First batch of K to 12 graduates are expected to graduate on March 2018.
2.
K to 12 enhances Mother Tongue-Based Multilingual Education
Starting in Kindergarten, the mother tongue, or the common language in the area shall be used as the medium for instruction, this, according to the Official Gazette, "students are able to learn best through their first language." From grades one to three, mother tongue together with English and Filipino will be used as language for instruction and will gradually transition to English and Filipino from grades four onwards.
3.
Specialized education for K to 12 students
Upon reaching Senior High School , the program will allow students to choose a specialization from the three tracks: Academic; Technical-Vocational-Livelihood; and Sports and Arts.
The student's choice of career track will define the content of the subjects he/she will take in Grades 11 and 12.
4.
K to 12 graduates are job ready
A student can obtain Certificates of Competency  or a National Certificate Level I  after grade 10 and a National Certificate Level II  after finishing a Technical-Vocational-Livelihood track in Grade 12, provided he/she passes the competency-based assessment of the Technical Education and Skills Development Authority .
NC I and NC II improves employability of graduates in fields like Agriculture, Electronics, and Trade which provides students an option for entrepreneurship, employment, or further education.
5.
Last country in Asia to implement K to 12
According to Rappler.com, prior to the its implementation, "the Philippines is the last country in Asia, and one of only 3 countries  worldwide, with a 10-year pre-university cycle."
With the implementation of the K to 12, Commission on Higher Education -Davao director Raul C.
Alvarez previously said that this will increase the competitiveness of student graduates in the country.

Overcoming life's rocky roads, Overcoming life's rocky roadsIvy C.
Tejano, "IT DOES not matter how long it will take as long as you never give up."
This, according to Marilou Pamaong Padungao, who is a teacher at Kumon Method of Learning Center in Davao City for eight years now.
Born in Katipunan, Alicia, Bohol in Central Visayas in 1990, Padungao completed Bachelor of Science in Education from University of Mindanao in 2013.
Padungao is already a licensed teacher after she passed the Licensure Examination for Teachers  in September 29, 2013.
She may not be popular like the other students in her school but her anecdote is worth pondering for those who just waste the wealth of their parents with their failing grades.
Padungao ventured to Davao City on July 2006 with her ambition to enter a university and finish her studies with the help of her aunt.
But that wasn't what happened.
Due to unexpected circumstance, Padungao's aunt could not financially support her in her studies.
"Ni sabot ko kay pamilyado man gud akong auntie.
Wala ko mabuhat na ni ana.
What I felt that time is fear...
fear that I could no longer reach my dream," Padungao said.
She said instead of her aunt, her cousin gave her tuition to enter the university, but she knew this will not take long.
Her cousin cannot sustain the expenses needed.
"Dili baya may kaya among pamilya.
Tanan kailangan haguan para lang maka-survive.
So, I have to look for other means to be able to survive in Davao," she added.
Padungao said before she left her family and siblings in Bohol, she promised to herself that she would graduate in college and have a decent job here, so she could help them.
She applied for a scholarship at the University of Mindanao where she was assigned as office staff in the Public Employment Service Officer  on 2006.
"Matagaan pa man ko allowance either sa akong auntie or pinsan pero dili man jud na magdugay mao nakahuna-huna pa jud ko mangita ug trabaho," Padungao said.
Padungao started working at Kumon as an assistant teacher in 2007 until she became a regular teacher of the center up to the present.
Despite of the heavy responsibilities on her shoulders, Padungao said she focused on her duties as a working student.
"Naa jud panahon na bation nimo ang kakapoy.
Dili baya dali maging working student.
Buti unta kung akong sarili lang ako ginabuhi, naga-padala pud ko sa Bohol," she said.
"I remember those times na akong dinner is watermelon lang, makakaon man sakto if kaya pa sa budget.
Pugong jud sa kwarta kay ga-board naman lang ko diri," she added.
It took quite some time before Padungao completed her study as there were semesters that she had to stop and focus on her work, to earn enough and study again.
What keeps her going is her faith in God and dream of becoming a full-fledged teacher, which it really happened also because of her hard work.
Padungao is grateful with what she have reached now.
She said if there's one thing she would like to teach to the students nowadays, it perseverance to education.
"I would say it again and again; poverty is not a hindrance for us to achieve our dream.
It is only through education we could attain a better life," Padungao said.

Quick tips to doing well in school, Quick tips to doing well in schoolEdward C.
Lactaoen, BEING in school is a struggle.
What with all the books to study, homework to do and projects to pass, it's a wonder how to keep up with the constant demands that school puts on students.
Luckily, some people who finished schooling with flying colors are here to share with you some advice to do better in school.

2015 Mutya ng Davao Kris Abegail Guanzon graduated from Ateneo de Davao University in 2013 with a degree in AB Mass Communication.
She also graduated with the distinctions of Cum Laude and Humanities and Letters Division Awardee.
Here are three tips from her to help oneself through school:
1.
Set your priorities.
Knowing your priorities as a student makes you more productive esp.
when you are bombarded with deadlines.
2.
Be active in school.
This is somehow a breather from all the academic stuff.
Also, this is an opportunity to be engaged in things you are passionate about.
3.
Take a break! After all the busyness brought by your acads and non-acads, learn to reward yourself.
It can be a quick stroll at the mall or whole-day Game of Thrones marathon!
Hijo Resources Corporation's Digital Marketing and Social Media Specialist, Reymond Pepito, who also graduated with a degree from Ateneo de Davao University in AB Mass Communication and was the Humanities Division Awardee in 2012, while juggling responsibilities with the school paper, Ateneo Debate Varsity and College Editors Guild of the Philippines also has some things to share:
1.
Set a goal.
Always begin with an end in mind.
It is important for you to choose a specific and realistic goal.
By putting value on something that you desire to achieve, it will make you even more motivated to do more in school in any given circumstances.

2.
Make studying a habit.
Confidence is a good thing but over-confidence is negligence.
At some point, be paranoid.
Make sure you've studied your lessons before taking the examinations.
Do not enter the classroom without your accomplished assignments and reports.
More than being a good student, studying is a form of discipline that will make you a responsible person.

3.
Have fun.
Participate in extra-curricular activities like joining the school paper, a sporting club, and the like.
Not all learnings can be found in the four corners of your classroom.
Lastly, Kriza Faye Calumba, who studied BS Food Technology at UP Mindanao and graduated as Magna Cum Laude and Class Valedictorian in 2014, has some advice to share as well:
1.
Learn to accept failure.
Failure is inevitable.
Don't wallow in gloom when you fail an exam or when you don't get a perfect score in a very easy quiz.
Instead of being disappointed with yourself, treat that failure as an opportunity to do better next time.
As Confucius said, "Our greatest glory is not in never failing, but in rising every time we fail." 
2.
Strive for excellence.
You can do more than what you think you can.
Give your best shot in everything and always remember to compete with yourself.
Strive for excellence not only within the four corners of the classroom, but also in your other endeavors.
3.
Get involved.
Practice the art of balancing.
Grades aren't everything.
Be involved - join organizations which will best help you pursue your passion, meet new people.
Make the most of various opportunities for you to be more socially aware, culturally sensitive, and understanding of the plight of others.
Being active in school doesn't only mold you into a well-rounded individual, but also allows you to pursue what genuinely makes you happy.

Also, know your priorities and effectively manage your time.
Learn when to work and when to play.
Don't forget to have fun! 
Taking the lead in culinary, Taking the lead in culinaryKriztja Marae G.
Labrador, PRODUCING a number of world-class chef graduates, the Center for Asian Culinary Studies  Davao is now offering Professional Culinary Arts Program and basic skills program.
Classes for Professional Culinary Arts Program and Pastry Arts will start on June this year while the basic skills program will be on May 2015.
This summer, CACS President and Chairman renowned Chef Gene Gonzales said that they will be launching their children and teens program.

They also have lifestyle classes this summer which only costs P2,500 per session.
CACS prides its method of instruction, which was developed by its founder Chef Gene, for it has successfully created an impressive roster of Executive chefs including a presidential chef and personal chefs to corporate tycoons and corporate heads.

The school only employs professional academicians to train its instructors to teach and maintain its educational system.
"This is the care we put in our instruction.
Curricula are consistently being kept abreast by a research and development department as we also develop food service systems side by side," said Chef Gene.
Besides their world class kitchen facilities, in their six years here in Davao, they have produced over 100 graduates for their professional culinary arts program and around 500 cooking and baking skills.
With CACS having Manila another aspect is that all instructors and important ingredients are flown in- There is no distinction between a Manila Student and Davao Student as the equipment, ingredients and instructors are the same in all campuses.
CACS-Davao is an extension to the main Manila branch which had been running for 14 years now and also producing successful chef graduates.
Moreover, Chef Gene said that for this year they will also launch their Asian Program that covers Chinese, Japanese, Korean, Thai, Filipino, Malay and Vietnamese.

CACS-Davao is located at Don Dionisio Complex, JP.
Cabaguio Avenue, Agdao.
For inquiries, you may contact them at 0933-353-1117 and 300-0126.

World class education at Montessori, World class education at MontessoriArianne Caryl N.
Casas, THE primary years of education must be child-centered, comprehensive, highly advanced and should have internationally-recognized curriculum since it is liable in shaping the minds and attitude of a child.

If you consider these qualifications, you can never go wrong in sending your kid to Montessori de Manila , an institution headed by Association Montessori Internationale -- an international governing body established by Dr.
Maria Montessori in 1929 in the Netherlands to maintain the integrity of her life's work.
It is the leading authority in Montessori education.
Its exceptional academics give parents a reason to smile.
MDM offers primary  education that accepts kids ages three years old and above; and elementary  for ages six years old and above with high academic standards and advanced curriculum but in affordable tuition fees compared to other Montessori or traditional schools.
Like many schools that strive to become innovative, global leaders, the future looks as bright as the one you envision for your child in MDM.
It boasts its roster of highly qualified, competent and dedicated professional educators with continuous training in the Montessori pedagogy, making it as one of the "Top Performing Schools in the Philippines" as per DECS 1994.
These professionals use wide range of Montessori didactic materials to teach students how to be articulate, confident, well-rounded and well-adjusted individuals.
Granting its well-prepared environment, MDM has been qualified as one of the "Top Ten Las Pinas Private Schools" as per 2009 National Achievement Test Results.
Its small class sizes with low student-teacher ratio; fully air-conditioned, clean, and spacious learning areas; nurturing and child-friendly environment; well-equipped libraries and computer and science laboratories; and safe and secure common areas and surroundings make the institution more conducive for learning.

MDM's efforts are focused on achieving highly advanced education while adhering to its founder's mission: produce happy graduates and accomplished professionals, enjoying careers locally and overseas.
"The child is both a hope and a promise for mankind," as what their founder Dr.
Maria Montessori believes.
As the association celebrates 29 years of quality Montessori education, armed with strengths that put them in a unique position to become one of the great institutions of the world, enroll your child at MDM-Davao.
It is strategically nestled at 46 Cordillera Road, Phase 2, Central Park Subdivision, Davao City.
For inquiries, call them at 297-3713, or email at mdmdavao@gmail.com.
Visit their website at www.montessoridemanila.edu.ph.
'Awkweird' stage, 'Awkweird' stageArianne Caryl N.
Casas, WE SPEND almost 10 hours in school, coping up with the lessons and joining some extra-curricular activities.
However, school is not all about books, lessons, projects, and assignments.
We also experience a lot of things about life-mostly funny.
Below are some brave testimonials of students and former students who had funny and "embarrassing" moments in school:
Ara, 24, Davao City:
We had a small chitchat with high school friends under our favorite tree during recess time.
We spent the whole time sharing funny experiences about a school event.
When it was my turn to say something funny, it turned out to be so, so embarrassing.
Why? I had colds that time and so, yeah, I ended up with a "bubble" of snot coming out my nose!
Ana, 18, General Santos City:
I was at first year high school that time and the school conducted a symposium on anti-rabies.
We were asked to join the symposium by class and by different year levels.
Together with my girl friend Kristel, we chose to sit at the back and beside my friend was our annoying classmate, Macky.
After the symposium, the guest speakers asked us to submit questions and on a 1/8 sheet of paper.
The question that I formed was "Maam, ingun nila, pag mapaakan ka ug iro, inuman daw ug shoktong? ." I wrote it dowm and due to my craziness, I used one of my classmate's name, who happened a target for pranks.

Kristel and Macky found out about my craziness and we laughed hard.
 
Because of that they also wrote their own questions like "Ma'am, asa mas grabe ug rabies? Sa akoa or sa iro? " and "Ma'am, pag paakun ko sa iro, paakon pud nako sya? "
The speaker then read my question and because the question was funny the students laughed.
The funniest part was that my classmate, whose name was on the paper I passed, didn't know anything about it and had an epic reaction.
Because of that, we were punished by our prefect of discipline with detention and suspension.
Fatima, 24, Mati City:
I hated my Grade 1 teacher for scolding me in front of my classmates.
During recess time, I rushed to one of the Indian trees near the quadrangle to cry due to humiliation.
However, my emotion grew into anger and resulted me to carve something that is "below the belt" into the tree against my teacher.
All this time, I thought she didn't know about it.
Lucky me, I still graduate with flying colors.
Many years have passed and we accidentally got to see each other again in a famous restaurant in Davao City.
Without any hesitation, she smiled, approached me and exclaimed: "Hi, Fatima! How are you? You were my favorite student then.
You know why? I could never ever forget what you wrote in that tree." And so, I was left tongue-tied and my face turned as red as blood.
RJ, 23, Davao City:
It was during my math exam when I was in grade 4.
My tummy was feeling funny and next thing I knew, I needed to poop.
But the comfort room at school was not the best place to do waste management.
Then I farted, which was followed by creamy poop.
Once the first few poop came out, it was unavoidable that the rest will come out.
I was wearing white shorts that time and I knew that there will be a glorious poop stain.
So I wore my black jogging pants to cover it up.
I went home with a heavy booty, that has squishy sounds when I took a seat on the tricycle.
The following morning, may classmates lightly teased mea about it after my stunt left a lingering smell on my seat.
Tips before shopping, Tips before shoppingAntonio L.
Colina IV, BARELY two months from now, students will be again ecstatic for the opening of the school year.
What makes them more excited though is when parents bring them to shop for new school stuffs.
Here are a few things to consider before deciding to burn your cash on a shopping spree:
Tip 1.
Check budget
Always check how much you can dispense out of your pocket.
From there, make a list of the things you need to buy for your kids, from bags, to notebooks, to pencils, and to new school uniforms.
Tip 2.
Choose quality over quantity
It pays to buy quality products at higher cost if that can last long.
Also, learn from the experiences of the past: which brands can fit best your tykes? Are they the type who give value to their possessions, or the ones, sorry, who are careless?
Tip 3.
Choose value-for-money
But quality doesn't always have to come at a price.
There are products that can assure you of quality at an affordable cost.
Tip 4.
Learn to re-use
Why buy new if you can re-use? That's why, it's important that we choose quality over quantity because you can save up a penny or two in a long run.
And what you've saved up you can allocate to buy additional stuff.
For bags, if you are creative enough, it needs a few decorative touches to make it good as new.
Tip 5.
Never go on impulse shopping
Don't be at the mercy of your impulses when you go shopping, or else you will end up depleting you savings or end up cursing yourself for buying the unnecessary.
Advice: be mindful of things that are needed by your kids.
No more, no less.
An Ifugao town's journey to progress and prosperity, An Ifugao town's journey to progress and prosperityLAMUT, Ifugao -- Called the "Gateway Municipality of Ifugao", this town was once a lowly community with poor road networks and high incidence of poverty.
Although blessed with vast tracts of flat lands and rolling hills, large part of the area consisted of idle and unproductive grasslands mostly used for grazing cattle and other ruminants because of lack of water and irrigation supply.

Agricultural production was also very poor.
The value of land then was very cheap since few people had the patience of toiling and making it productive.
Buyers were scarce with the harsh reality it would be difficult living in the area as travel and communication in the place was hard due to lack of road networks, communication facilities and other infrastructures.

But situation changed with the construction of the Hapid National Irrigation System along the Bulao River of this town in the late 1990s.

From a gloomy and laidback life, the future turned rosy with the place transformed into a bustling and busy commercial and trade center.

Following the completion of the irrigation system, many people became interested in buying and owning lands in the area.
And the value of the once cheap lands skyrocketed.

Still, more people were drawn to reside in the place because of the promise of a bright future.

Soon, the vast tract of flat and grassy idle lands were converted into irrigated rice fields and agricultural farmlands bringing the owners and people bountiful harvest each cropping while other parts of the lands were also excavated and turned into fishponds producing the tilapia fish.

Today, after a decade of the water supply paving the way for agricultural development, the municipality of Lamut is now a 4th class municipality and continuously emerging as an investment frontier rapidly overtaking the rest of the towns of Ifugao in terms of progress and development with a growth rate of 2.28%.

Lamut has a land area of 14,581.25 hectares  with 5,480.18 has.
for agriculture; 5,390 has.
for watershed forestry; 1,550 has.
as pastureland and 1,641.02 as built-up area.
It has a total population of 23,080 .
As of the latest survey of roads, the municipality has a total road inventory of 182.63 kilometers with 18% or 33.5 kms.
 already paved; 81.5 kms.
or 45% graveled and 67.93 kms.
or 37% of it is earth road.

Communication  in the area also  improved basically  through postal communication and speed mail services, local broadcast services, telephone and cellular mobile phone services, internet services, cable television and private satellite dish telephone services.

The town has   two hotels and inns, two banking institutions, three  registered cooperatives,  two registered private financing institutions and 502 registered firms.

Likewise, the construction of a bigger district hospital  at Barangay Banting expanded its role for the accommodation of health services and facilities with a province-wide coverage after the de-commissioning of the Ifugao General Hospital in Lagawe  with its worn out building  no longer fit for operations.

As an emerging agro-industrial center, the municipality has trading centers that function as "bagsakan" or drop-off areas for the wholesale transaction of products and goods.
There is also the Provincial Livelihood Center  that showcases Ifugao products and provides market linkage among buyers and producers.

The town boasts of its  flourishing  tilapia  fish production.
Tilapia  was chosen as the One-Town-One Product  of the municipality with the slogan 201cFish and Development201d .
 The fishpond areas of the place cover a total of 92 has.
owned by 250 fisherfolks with a total of 1,000 farm workers that produce an average of 1,000 tons of fish per annum.

Together with the municipality of Alfonso Lista,  theys made Ifugao the top producer of in-land fish in the Cordillera Administrative Region.
The presence of the Provincial Hatchery and the Regional Hatchery for Pangasius   in the municipality makes  Lamut the center for Tilapia and Pangasius production in the province.

Being the gateway of the province, the town has the comparative advantage as a major link to the lowland provinces of Nueva Vizcaya, Quirino and Isabela offering opportunities to trade and market development not only of the municipality but for the entire province of Ifugao.

Indeed the municipality has traveled a long way to progress and development.
Aside from fish production, it is an investment area for the manufacture of agro-based products, rice and corn trading and milling, production of high value crops, organically grown products, cattle production, agricultural contract growing, agricultural inputs and agricultural financing.

Forever a teacher, Forever a teacherKriztja Marae G.
Labrador, IN FALLING in love, they say "age does not matter."
This proves true for Azucena Tanguanco Bajao, who fell in love with teaching and still continues to live this love by teaching others on the daily walks of life.
Azucena served as a teacher for more than 31 years, wherein her main mission up to this day is to instill moral values not only to children but also to their parents.
"I love to teach children, teaching moral values to them, I am really particular with moral values including the parents, at least I can share my experience and also the religious aspect to them," she said in vernacular.
Azucena was born in Tangalan, Aklan on June 25, 1947 and they moved to Davao eight months after she was born.
Most of her growing up years, she had her grandparents as her guardians.
From them, she learned the values she lives and shares with others.

"I remember before my lola would tell me to sleep early so that I can wake up at 4 a.m.
to study and to never miss church," she said.
Azucena finished her elementary education at Sta.
Ana Elementary School in 1959 and her high school education at Davao City High School in 1963.
She then finished her bachelor's degree in Elementary Education at the University of Mindanao in 1967 and her master's degree in Guidance and Counseling at the International Hardvardian University in 1985.
After her service as a teacher and as a guidance counselor for six years, she became the barangay kagawad in Buhangin proper in 2003 during which she was also the president of the religious group Gamayng Kristohanong Katilingban  at that time.
Azucena has been serving as the Office of the Senior Citizen Affairs  head since 2011.
"I am very happy in helping others," she said.
Being blessed with a loving husband, five children and six grandchildren, Azucena still continues sharing the values she had learned from her lolo and lola not only by living them day to day but also serving as resource speaker to the Davao City Social Services and Development Office on responsible parenthood.
From small to great, From small to greatMaria Gemima C.
Valderrama, THE growth of one is the growth of all.
 This is perhaps the most essential part of cooperatives.
Maco Development Cooperative  just celebrated 25 years of operation.
 In its silver anniversary, Chairman of the Board Manuel M.
Esperanza remembers their humble beginnings with a grateful heart.
Madeco started as a little sari-sari store put up by Fr.
Rolando Macale, the parish priest of Maco which was still part of Davao del Norte then.
Esperanza said it became Maco Consumer Cooperative or Macoco in 1986.
 It grew into nine branches but only one store stood the test of time.
Only Branch 5, he said, was left and determined members turned it into a cooperative.
 But it wasn2019t that easy as Madeco became one of those dying cooperatives in the country.
 
An organization from Canada, Esperanza said, helped Madeco rise to become a cooperative to truly serve not just the people of Maco, but the entire province as well.
 In 1990, Madeco was duly registered with the Cooperative Development Authority as a multi-purpose cooperative.
Cooperatives in the Philippines are recognized with an important role in the development of the nation.
Cooperatives are based on the values of self-help, self-responsibility, democracy, equality, equity, and solidarity.
In the tradition of their founders, cooperative members believe in the ethical values of honesty, openness, social responsibility, and caring for others.
Madeco, in two and a half decades, continues its campaign in reaching out the people in the community.
As a fast growing cooperative, Madeco gives credit to the determination of Francisco and Victoria Capoy, Carmen Gado, Annielita Torreflores, Cerelita Vital, Nenita Costiniano, and Rolando Aceberos, who helped them stand on their own.
After 25 years, Madeco has established four branches located in Maco, Mabini, Tagum, and Mawab with about 80 employees all in all.
 It plans to open another branch in Davao to expand its membership, products, and services.
Madeco has savings and credit where they create the opportunity for people to take responsibility of their own financial resources.
 They encourage members to save and they promote thriftiness so that members will inculcate the habit of saving.
 They look at the members2019 finances and ensure that they are spending less than they earn.
Today, Madeco has payroll servicing, LTO processing, time deposit, share capital, kiddie youth club for 17 years old and below who want to save, and insurance.
The little sari-sari store in 1990 has now become Madeco Mart, a growing mini-mart.
 It is now located in a bigger area and it assists members with sari-sari stores as they are given credit lines and reward cards where they can earn points.
Madeco also engaged in gasoline business since 2009.
 The idea came out to provide a much needed fuelling resource in Maco area.
Today, they have an additional installation of gas pumps.
 The benefits of members who have capital share invested in gasoline include earning dividend and patronage refund based on the purchases they made for the year.
Madeco obviously was an epitome of 201clittle things make big things happen201d.
Esperanza remembers that their first few meetings were held in a waiting shed where they can sit freely and gather together with their favourite maruya and iced water as their snacks.
 He jokingly said that soon they were able to add pancit in that gathering in the waiting shed.
Now they have accumulated a building where they can hold meetings and big gatherings.
 Madeco may not be as big as the other cooperatives but its founders, officers, and members have proven that it surpassed all the different challenges in the phases of economy.
Chairman Esperanza said the present officers will try their best to make Madeco more responsive to the needs of the members.
201cWe do not just want Madeco to survive; we want it to live vibrantly.
 We do not just manage it; we want to create opportunities for all so that Madeco will help build a community of people whose dreams can be realized,201d he said.
The Board of Directors are composed of educators, engineer, accountants, and businessmen.
Chairman Esperanza2019s leadership is supported by the Board of Directors Abenir O.
Labja, Xerlito E.
Torculas, Ramel C.
Tuba, Russel R.
Nuneza, Felixberto L.
Leray, and Marcelino P.
Alicarte.
For them, Madeco will transform communities, build lives, and connect with the global community.
Off the streets, Off the streets

HIS life journey has been trending on social media after his story was posted on Facebook that reached more than 50,000 shares.
From being a street kid to a Development Communication graduate at the Jesuit-run Xavier University in 2014, Rustie Quintana, 25, showed how he has turned the impossible to possible by just dreaming on and working hard to achieve those dreams while putting God first before anything else.
Leaving home, exposing himself to drugs, getting in-out of various rescue centers, and being arrested, all these had become imprints of his life.
He never wanted those dark days in his life but he was just a kid back then.
A misguided one who was exposed to an environment that influenced him in the most indecent way.
 
Giving back
Now that he has something he wants to impart, Rustie spends his time with the street children in Cogon area or Divisoria.
One of his goals is to help get other kids off the streets.
He can2019t give back by giving money, but what he can do is bring them to the Alternative Learning System , if they are willing to learn.
If they can pass ALS, they can proceed to getting vocational courses at the Technical Education and Skills Development Authority .
He meets with the street kids once a week to ask them about their education.
If ever they have questions, he helps them out in any way that he could.
Rustie recalled that a friend, he once took to ALS, now based abroad is doing well.
201cUbanan jud nako hantud makita nako ang impact,201d he said.
Knowing that he is doing well outside, it leaves certain happiness in Rustie2019s heart because he has helped him grow by doing his part.

He wants to inspire the kids by sharing his experiences and talents.
Encouraging them that anything can happen if they so believe that they can.

Defining moment
Rustie used to think that he couldn2019t do it, but a defining moment came to change his mind.

He remembered a time when he was young that while sitting on a tree past midnight and playing his flute.
He was looking on the street kids and it saddened him how they were wasting every moment of their lives.
But what made him cry was seeing an old man pushing a cart.
He cried wondering how he could change things, because he did not want to be like the old man.
 
But rather, he2019d want to grow old with his wife and children.
And see his children have children.
To live in a house they can call home.
A life knowing that everything is in place and worrying is no longer needed.
 
201cPag graduate nako, malipayon kaayo ko kay nakab-ot nko akong goal.
Mao man gud ning akong number one nga gina-ampo.
Dili gud ko makatuo na mahuman jud nako,201d Rustie said.
Despite the difficulties and challenges he met as he entered the university life, Rustie certainly had the drive to finish it.

2018Arts for scholarship2019
Currently, he2019s teaching kids in 201cArts for Scholarship201d workshop with his fellow artist Mauwee Mangcong at Ni\xf1o Maria Learning Center.
They cater to everyone especially the out-of-school youth, scholars, and others.
They not only want them to enhance their skills in painting, but the workshop also offers other modules like dancing and bamboo-flute making.

201cLibre tanan gamit.
Mura sad sila gaanhi para maglingaw-lingaw,201d Rustie said.

There is a summer promo offering at P500 a month and Rustie said that a lot of kids have already enrolled not only to learn but to also have fun.

Worries on work
While doing something on giving back, he has something to worry about2014work.
He2019s been receiving invites for guesting and hiring though, which is not on regular basis.
And what worries him is his family
considering that Rustie is the bread winner.
He has to provide his family their needs, like what a father does.
201cIf mag trabaho ko2019g layo, mapasmo akong pamilya,201d he said.
Also, he doesn2019t have the money to travel that far right now.

He said that it2019s even difficult to look for money to buy rice.
Not to mention the rent they have to pay.
Rustie2019s family has a land in Butuan but it2019s not the same as having it and calling it your own.
 
After his story was published online, he was grateful that people were inspired by his story.
Meanwhile, there are also other people who are judging him and labelled him to be into a 201cdrug syndicate.201d With this, he said: 201cWhen I was doing those things, I was still young.
Nobody taught me what was right, what was wrong.201d 
Although he2019s grateful that people are congratulating him for what he has attained, it2019s not helping him in any way with his living.
201cIf they can donate rice, that would be a big help to me and my family,201d he quipped.

201cDili ko rich, pero rich ko2019g talents,201d he said.

He earns by doing what he does best 2013 using his artistic abilities: 201cIf people are interested to buy my paintings, they are more than welcome to do so.201d
Looking back at everything he has been through, he thanked the people who believed in him, Mother Teresa Foundation, and especially God for helping him become the person he is right now.

Staying at Mother Teresa Foundation for four years has taught him a lot of things.
He learned to have the right attitude, values, and found God that made him into a very prayerful person.

Rustie said that he and God have a special kind of relationship, that God understands him.
201cWithout Him, I wouldn2019t have gone this far,201d he said.

201cKung limpyo imong kasingkasing, ang blessings, moabot ra na,201d he said.

He invests in love saying that 201cwe should do the same as well,201d as placed his right hand in his left chest.
 
201cBlessings do come,201d he said.

201cDili sa ka bright or kabugok sa tawo, paningkamutan jud na nimo,201d he added.

201cOut from nothing, and now it2019s everything,201d he said.

If Rustie conquered the challenges that life threw at him, others can surely do so.

Masbad: Graduation gifts, Masbad: Graduation giftsRoark L.
Masbad, Wacky Tech, IT'S graduation season! Congratulations to the graduates of 2015! 
For the college graduates, welcome to the world outside the halls of academe! It2019s a dog-eat-dog world out here as some would say.
But in most cases, it2019s just the world being real.
Nothing fancy schmancy about it.

So, this week I have a few suggestions what to get for yourself as a gift after crawling through college.

Cloud Storage
If you2019re not using any cloud storage until now, you should be.
Moreso if you2019re using smartphones or tablets.
It will save your behind in more ways than one especially if you have critical work files.
Imagine yourself saving those files to a USB drive and minutes before your crucial presentation, those USB drives suddenly don2019t work.
What do you do? That2019s where cloud storage can literally save you and your career.

If you have a Google account, you already have Google Drive.
Use that.
If you don2019t have a Dropbox account yet, get one already.
Use that.
Those are the top two options I2019d recommend because I use them myself and have never failed me.
Oh, they both have apps that you can download to your devices so you can have access to your files 24/7.

Notebook and Pen
Yes, the good ol2019 notebook & pen combo.
Keep it stashed in your bag.
It will be an indispensable pair of tools to keep up with your ever-creative mind.
Let2019s face it, there are a lot of times that an idea of slew of ideas come to mind that you just have to record.
Unfortunately, our electronic devices can2019t catch up to how fast our brains process these things.
The closest things that can are our hands paired with a good writing pen and a notebook to write on.

Look for those quirky notebook designs that speak of your personality.
It can be a lined-page notebook or a blank-page notebook.
It doesn2019t matter.
What matters more here is that it2019s an analog solution to keeping up with your active mind.

A Good Book
Get yourself a book.
Not an eBook.
A book! A physical book with real paper bound together with that definitive smell of a new book when you first open it.
I recommend a non-fiction book; something to help you grow; something to help you develop your inner strengths; something on leadership perhaps.

A book never runs out of batteries and it never needs a cellular or wi-fi signal to be accessed.
It just needs to be brought out of your bag and the pages turned.
Simple.
Glorious.
Exhilarating.

In the end, whatever it is that you2019ll get for yourself as a gift, use it as a tool to help yourself.
Don2019t let it be what dictates how you work or how you solve problems.
Just because your USB drive failed on you doesn2019t mean you can2019t make your presentation.
Be creative.
Be spontaneous.

Life is like a box of chocolates.
You2019ll never know what you2019ll get.

Congratulations again graduates! May your journey be filled with everything that life has to offer and may these mold you into the person you are meant to be.
Village chief is now lawyer, Village chief is now lawyerRhona Goc-ong-Villariasa, SECOND chances are not given to make things right, but to prove that one can do better even after a fall.
He did not succeed in his first hitch in the Bar examination, but it didn't prevent Joseph Patrick O.
Escovilla, barangay captain of Megkawayan in Calinan District, to strive more and try his luck the second time around.
Escovilla is just one of the thousands examinees who passed the Bar exams held in October 2014.
This, for Escovilla, is a big blessing for him, an answered prayer after all the sacrifices and sleepless nights he had.
Based on the results, 1,126 passed the 2014 bar exam out of 5,984 takers or a national passing average of 18.825 percent.
As a public servant, Escovilla tried his best to balance his work as a barangay captain while spending quality time for his Bar review.
"Nagre-review ako five times a week.
Self-review lang ako sa mga coffee shops.
Then I visit the barangay Tuesdays and Fridays, that time yung constituents natin alam na nila na andun ako, kaya by that time pumupunta sila ng barangay for their concerns," said Escovilla, who expressed gratitude to his constituents for their understanding during the crucial days of his review.
"You have to read a lot of books, bale quota-quota ka dapat sa natatapos mong basahin.
You have to study eight subjects, di talaga ganun kadali," said Escovilla, who spent six months of sleepless and tiring days and nights for his review.
It wasn't for the first time that Escovilla took the Bar exams.
He admitted he took the Bar before but he was not able to make it.

He didn't deny that he felt down upon knowing the result, but somehow he realized he needs to exert more time and effort if he want to succeed.

"Second time na to, mas grabe yung first time kasi I was on leave talaga for my review sa Manila, but it didn2019t materialize, so I told myself, dito na lang ako, self-review na lang tayo.
So what I did, report sa barangay, then review, naka-survive din naman," he said.
This second termer barangay captain of Barangay Megkawayan started his law course at Ateneo de Davao University, but finished it at Cor Jesu College last 2013.
He lamented that at his young age he already dreamt of becoming a lawyer.
"Grade 6 sa yearbook namin nilagay ko dun I want to be a lawyer.
Yun yung dala-dala ko till I reach college."
Now that he is a lawyer, Escovilla said this is a big help to someone like him who2019s into public service.
"Mas okay talaga if you are knowledgeable sa law.
Whatever man yung natutunan ko, I will impart this sa mga constituents ko.
Eto rin yung hiningi ko sa Diyos na pag ibinigay niya sa akin, I won2019t hesitate to give it back to the people," he said.
At the age of 27, Escovilla has a lot of plans on his head, not only for the people around him, much more to himself.
A proud son of a businessman named Glenn and a Certified Public Accountant mother named Maria Delia, Escovilla grew in an environment that has much interaction with the public.
His father was also a former chief of barangay of Megkawayan.
"Nasanay nako sa maraming tao, kaya it2019s not hard for me to adjust when I seek for a position sa barangay.
After sa term ng father ko, ako yung pumalit, and since then, till now ang dami ko pang gustong gawin before I end up my term," he said.
Born June 23, 1987, the eldest of four siblings, five years from now, Escovilla dreams of having his own family and a law firm.
When asked if he wants to venture on a much higher position, Escovilla answered: "Sa puso ko wala na, mas uunahin ko muna yung barangay ko.
Marami pa akong gusto gawin, I2019ll focus muna dun."
Escovilla2019s determination to excel despite the adversities is an example of what they say "never say die."
He failed on some aspect but he bounced back on his second chance and tried to do better.

This young public servant believes that even if life sometimes drag him with difficulties, he just imagine that these are just trials that will bring him into something greater opportunities.
Kaplag 2015 International Conference starts, Kaplag 2015 International Conference startsTO COMMEMORATE the discovery of the holy image of the Se\xf1or Santo Ni\xf1o, Kaplag 2015 International Conference was held in Cebu City Saturday, April 25.
The conference will tackle about the historical background on the finding of the image of the Santo Ni\xf1o de Cebu, architectural characteristics of early Augustinian churches in the Philippines, and the Augustinian general curia2019s historical documents about early Christianization of the Philippines, among other topics.
The four-day event is held at Radisson Blu Hotel from April 25 to 28.
On Saturday, the key speakers were Maria Serena Diokno, chairman of the National Historic Commission of the Philippines; Fr.
Luis Marin de San Martin, OSA, Archivist general of the Order of Saint Augustine; and Fr.
Fernando Martinez Rojo, OSA.


Those who are interested to join the conference may may visit Radisson Blu Hotel.
  
450 Kaplag Achival Documents Exhibit, 450 Kaplag Achival Documents Exhibit


 

, CEBU CITY.
Representatives from the National Archives of the Philippines, Augustinian Province of Sto.
Ni\xf1o de Cebu-Philippines and Kaplag organizers opened on Saturday the "Panaglambigit sa Katawhan ug Kultura" archival documents exhibit at the Ayala Center Cebu.
The exhibit is part of the 450th Kaplag Anniversary.
\r
Sun.Star wins in 1st Sarihay, Sun.Star wins in 1st SarihaySUN.STAR Davao brought home the Best News Story  in the 1st Sarihay  Media Awards initiated by the Foundation for Philippine Environment  to fan interest in reporting about the environment.
Sun.Star Davao editor-in-chief Stella A.
Estremera won the award for her article 201cDavao Gulf: Rich spawning ground201d.
The other finalists in the category were Juancho R.
Mahusay of the Island Sentinel for his articles, 201cOccidental Mindoro province is now the 'tuna capital' of the Philippines201d, and Mahusay again but this time writing for Mindoro Star for his article, 201cOriental Mindoro opens Philippines' first renewable energy project by an electric coop201d, Juancho R.
Mahusay.
Estremera was a finalist in all four categories that community papers are qualified to join, with five articles making the grade.
Winner for Best News Story  was Jonathan L.
Mayuga of Business Mirror for his article 201cEnsuring rivers are clean201d.
For Best Investigative Report Published in a Newspaper or Magazine, the winner was 201cStinking snag201d by the Manila Bulletin Research Team.
Best Feature Story Published in a Newspaper or Magazine was won by Mon Mikko E.
Misagal of the Manila Bulletin for his article 201cPH birds caught between discovery, extinction201d.
Best Commentary or Editorial Article went to Philippine Daily Inquirer2019s Ceres Doyo for her column article, 201cEl Nino redux201d.
The other winners are: 201cMathematics of mangrove conservation201d by Dr.
Custer C.
Deocaris of DZEC Radyo Agila for Best Radio Commentary , 201cIllegal logging sa Ipo Dam watershed201d by Cesario del Rosario Jr of 9TV for Best TV News Reportage, 201cYaman ng Bayan: Tubig201d by Brandenberg Milla of TV5 for Best TV Documentary, 201cMatanglawin: Disaster preparedness201d by Grace Sugcang of ABS-CBN, 201cRethinking the National Greening Program201d by Pia Ranada of Rappler.com for Best Online Commentary/Report, and 201cWildlife Sanctuary201d by Ernie Penaredondo of the Philippine Star for Best Photo Essay.
There were over 81 entries for all categories, which were pre-screened and selected by a technical working committee comprised of representatives from the Department of Environment and Natural Resources-Biodiversity Management Bureau , DENR-Public Affairs Office , Philippine Tropical Forest Conservation Foundation, Inc.
, Tanggol Kalikasan Inc., Miriam College Environmental Studies Institute , and FPE.
The judges for the final round were: Dr.
Theresa Mundita S.
Lim , Ms.
Maria Sabrina Cruz , Dr.
Donna Paz T.
Reyes , Atty.
Jose Andres Canivel , Atty.
Ma.
Generosa T.
Mislang , Ms.
Yolanda Crisanto , Mr.
Joel Palma , Dr.
Severino R.
Sarmenta , Atty.
Rose Liza E.
Osorio and Mr.
Godofredo T.
Villapando, Jr.
.
Masbad: #PrayforNepal, Masbad: #PrayforNepalRoark L.
Masbad, Wacky Tech, I HAVE never been to Nepal.
I, however, have a classmate from my master2019s degree classes who is from Nepal.
I offer this space this week to ask everyone to #PrayforNepal.
As you already know, the country was recently hit by an earthquake.
Casualty numbers are rising and so many are affected.
We live in a borderless world these days with the ubiquity of the internet.
And it2019s only right that we take a breather from our routines and say a quick prayer for Nepal as a country and all its peoples that they may rise above the rubble stand taller, stronger.
Photo from http://seen.co/event/7.8-earthquake-in-nepal.-nearly-600-dead.--2015-302...


How to help Nepal earthquake victims, How to help Nepal earthquake victimsAID groups are rushing to get crucial supplies to survivors of Nepal's devastating earthquake, which has killed thousands of people.
Here's a look at humanitarian efforts that are underway in Nepal and how to donate online.
Hover through the image and click on the red dots to view details.



Microsoft opens Windows 10 to Apple, Android apps, Microsoft opens Windows 10 to Apple, Android apps
Joe Belfiore, Microsoft Corporate Vice President of Operating Systems Group, demonstrates Continuum for phones at the Microsoft Build conference in San Francisco, Wednesday, April 29, 2015.
While Microsoft has already previewed some aspects of the new Windows 10, a parade of top executives will use the conference to demonstrate more software features and app-building tools, with an emphasis on mobile devices as well as PCs.

Microsoft wants to make Windows 10 the universal software for PCs, phones and other Internet-connected gadgets.
, SAN FRANCISCO 2014 Microsoft hopes to get more people using the next version of its Windows software on all kinds of devices by giving them access to many of the same apps they're already using on Apple or Android phones.
In a major strategy shift, a top executive told an audience of several thousand software developers Wednesday that Microsoft will release new tools to help them quickly adapt the apps they've built for Apple or Android gadgets, so they will work on smartphones, PCs and other devices that use the new Windows 10 operating system coming later this year.
On the first day of the company's annual software conference, other executives showed off more uses for Microsoft's holographic "augmented reality" headset, the HoloLens 2014 although it's not yet for sale.
They also announced the official name for a new web browser, called "Edge," that they promised will be faster and more useful than the Internet Explorer that's been a Microsoft mainstay for 20 years.
All those initiatives are tied to the impending release of Windows 10, the centerpiece of Microsoft's ambitions to regain the stature it commanded when Windows-based PCs dominated the computing world.
Today, after losing ground to smartphones and tablets that run software from rivals Apple and Google, Microsoft wants to make Windows 10 the universal software for PCs, phones and other Internet-connected gadgets.
"Windows 10 represents a new generation of Windows, built for an era of more personal computing," CEO Satya Nadella said during a keynote speech, adding that today's consumers and corporate workers want to have the same experience when they are using a variety of devices.
Although Microsoft has previously shown off some features of Windows 10, it's hoping to enlist an army of software developers as allies in its campaign to build enthusiasm for the new release.
The company is using the three-day conference, called Build, to demonstrate more features and app-building tools, with an emphasis on mobile devices as well as PCs.
"Our goal is to make Windows 10 the most attractive development platform ever," Vice President Terry Myerson said.
To win over consumers who use competing software, Microsoft needs to persuade outside developers, who create software for consumers and corporate clients, it's worth their time to create new apps and programs for Windows 10.
"Getting developer buy-in is absolutely the crucial thing," said J.P.
Gownder, a tech industry analyst at Forrester Research.
He said Microsoft has struggled with a "chicken-and-egg" problem, in which developers have been reluctant to build mobile apps for Windows because relatively few people use Windows phones and tablets.
Currently, there are more than 1.4 million apps for Android phones and about the same for Apple devices, while there are only a few hundred thousand apps that work on Windows phones and tablets.
Microsoft's move to help developers adapt their Apple and Android apps for Windows 10 is a major change from the past, when each company maintained rigid differences in their software platforms.
Microsoft is also hoping to entice developers by promising that apps for Windows 10 will work equally well on PCs, mobile gadgets, Xbox game consoles and even the HoloLens.
The company has another big carrot to wave in front of those developers: Microsoft has already said it will release Windows 10 as a free upgrade to people who now have PCs or other gadgets running the previous two versions of Windows, provided they upgrade in the coming year.
That could help create a huge new audience of Windows 10 users in a relatively short time, Gownder said.
Myerson predicted there will be a billion devices using Windows 10 within the next two to three years.
Apps for all those devices will be distributed through a single Windows app store.
Myerson also said Microsoft will partner with wireless carriers so consumers who lack credit cards can pay for apps on their phone bill 2014 a popular method in developing nations.
Microsoft has not said exactly when Windows 10 is coming, although some were hoping the company would announce a date on Wednesday.
Since he became CEO last year, Nadella has been presiding over a major overhaul at Microsoft.
He has redesigned some of Microsoft's most popular programs for mobile users and invested in new "cloud-computing" services, in which businesses pay to use software that's housed in Microsoft's data centers.
Microsoft announced several new initiatives Wednesday for its Azure cloud-computing service, which has emerged as a fast-growing rival to a popular cloud business operated by Amazon.
Microsoft is releasing new programming tools for Azure clients to create programs for computers that run Apple and Linux software, as well as those that run Windows.

Kid2019s First celebrates 10 years of helping kids be awesome, Kid2019s First celebrates 10 years of helping kids be awesome
Learning takes place as young children touch and manipulate things, interact with people and share their thoughts about their experiences.
This makes learning fun and more meaningful to these children.

TEACHING young children is often said to be more than just a job.
It is a vocation that requires wholehearted commitment and whose results come only in the long term.
For Kid2019s First Discovery Space, their 10 years of patience and creativity now yields a roster of kids who are happy, confident and show an eagerness to learn and explore.
Yet, celebrating the 10-year milestone is no reason to take it easy.
According to school principal Vanessa Morales-Balquiedra, toddler and preschool educators in the country still have much do to.
201cAccess to early childhood education is still limited perhaps because our culture has yet to seriously believe that learning takes place even at the youngest age.
Our government also has to strictly implement legislation by allocating a bigger budget to promote early childhood education and make this a priority,201d she said.
As a highlight of its 10-year anniversary, Kid2019s First has initiated activities to help communities improve their services to learners of any age and background.
Particularly, they will be providing school materials to MovEd.org, a non-profit group that supports daycare centers in indigent communities around the Philippines.
Also, Kid2019s First will be helping raise funds for Starlight Training School for Special Youth in creating their kitchen lab.
The Starlight School, located in Cavite, educates and trains students with special needs the vocational skills and life skills to become active, positive contributing members of society.
201cThe goal is to help Starlight continue their vocational work in helping the young adults in their care learn how to cook, a skill that may assist them to be productive citizens,201d Morales-Balquedra said.
Morales-Balquedra said these two activities extend the current programs and mission of Kid2019s First.
201cOur mission is to provide a safe space where there is respect for diversity, where each child is recognized for his or her own abilities, interests, ideas, needs and respecting cultural identity.
Our Class programs are based on a progressive approach where children learn and explore through first hand experiences.201d
At first look, Kid2019s First Discovery Space may seem like a play date instead of a learning session.
And that2019s the intention: what we adults know as play is actually discovery and exploration for a child.
Together with her partner and Early Childhood Intervention coordinator, Jennifer Teves-Manalo, they create school activities aimed to enhance each child2019s natural curiosity to discover new things.
The school2019s planned daily activities are flexible enough for children to pursue their own interests.
They are given time to experiment, explore, dream and create while they are with their friends.
Kid2019s First also offers early childhood intervention and special education programs and services for youngsters with developmental delays.
Their curriculum uses a range of educational and therapeutic strategies in group and individual settings to promote the health, well-being, and developmental needs of these children.

"Children with developmental delays are welcomed, as inclusion play-based classes are made available for them.
Kids will have the chance to interact through arts, cooking, pretend play and storytelling with their peers, teachers and therapists,201d said Teves-Manalo.
The approach is very 201chands-on201d where the children actively interact with various materials, people and places, so that they have worthwhile experiences while in the center.
There is emphasis on concrete learning rather than abstract learning.
The school also provides music classes, speech and language therapy, occupational therapy, home and school visits, screening, social skills playgroups, preschool inclusion, transition to school, parent and caregiver education and training.
Hence, Kid2019s First can provide families with a central location where they have access to a wide range of quality programs services to meet their needs.
201cWhen I first planned Kid2019s First back in 2003, I had just returned from studying in Columbia University and working in New York.
I was exploring the idea of putting up a preschool here in the Philippines with a more progressive approach compared to what I was exposed to years before that.
 When I went around the area , I was surprised to see a lot of preschools sprouting like mushrooms, mostly which were put up by businessmen and businesswomen and not educators.
The challenge for me then was to push the envelope and raise the standards of early childhood education,201d said Morales-Balquiedra.
Ten years later, Kid2019s First continues with its commitment to fulfill every child2019s learning potential by fostering his or her intellectual, creative, emotional, social and physical development.

Sendong survivor is incoming freshman of UP Diliman , Sendong survivor is incoming freshman of UP Diliman 
CAGAYAN DE ORO.
Rene L.
Principe Jr.
, graduate of Regional Science High School of Cagayan de Oro City, is among the five Pantawid Pamilya beneficiaries who earned academic scholarship with the Department of Science and Technology.

RENE Liboon Principe Jr.
and his family almost drowned to death when Tropical Storm Sendong inundated some parts of northern Mindanao in the evening of December 16, 2011.
Rene2019s family, a beneficiary of Pantawid Pamilya, is among the thousand families here and in Iligan City who were affected by the flash flood brought about by the torrential rains during the onslaught of Sendong.
His father, Rene Sr., woke them up when the water was knee-high inside their house in Zone 4, Pasil, Kauswagan here.
The water reached the roof gutter level.
Rene and his family witnessed the flood water rushed down the Kauswagan area, a barangay along Cagayan de Oro River.
Rene heard adults and children crying for help as they were being carried away by the rampaging waters.
The flood destroyed their house.
It left knee-deep of mud.
They hurriedly went to an evacuation established by Department of Social Welfare and Development  which was some five kilometers away from their house.
Rene recalled that life inside an evacuation center was so hard, considering the sleepless nights and long queues for food and non-food items they mostly needed.
Resiliency
Rene Jr.
was a freshman student of Regional Science High School here when Sendong devastated northern Mindanao and took lives of residents living along Cagayan de Oro River here and in Mandulog River in Iligan City.
Typhoon Sendong submerged personal items of Rene2019s family; including his books and other supplies.
But Rene Jr.
did not let the calamity get in the way of achieving his dreams.
He continued to excel in his classes.
The cash grants of Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program and other interventions from DSWD and donations from local and international humanitarian organizations have helped Rene and his family live back to normalcy during those he described as trying times.
Focus on achieving dream
Rene Jr., youngest among the five Principe siblings, did not stop aiming at achieving his dream in life, who wants to become an Astronaut.
Impossible as it may seem, Rene said he does his best to become a spaceman.
He even said that he is willing to go to Mars and live there for the rest of his life.
Top 1 in his section and a graduate of Regional Science High School here, Rene Jr.
has been a consistent honor student since his elementary.
Despite getting offers of full scholarship from private universities here, Rene Jr.
opted to confirm his interest to enroll at University of the Philippines-Diliman, taking up Bachelor of Science in Physics after passing the UPCAT .
Rene Jr.
is also an academic scholar of the Department of Science and Technology.
                                                                                    
Thank DSWD, PNoy
201cI am very thankful to DSWD for helping poor families like us.
I was able to comply with all the projects and bought requirements for my laboratory projects because of Pantawid Pamilya,201d said Rene Jr.
201cAlso, I thanked President Benigno Aquino III for implementing Pantawid Pamilya through DSWD,201d Rene said, adding that, 201ccritics of the president should look at the fruits of labor of all his projects.201d
201cWe are the living proof of the gains of the administration,201d Rene Jr.
said.
Pantawid Pamilya is a government2019s poverty-reduction strategy that provides cash grants to extremely poor households aimed at helping them raise educated and healthy children aged 18 years and below.
It utilizes the Conditional Cash Transfer  scheme where beneficiaries receive cash grant provided that they send their children to school, get preventive health checkup, and the parents attend the monthly Family Development Session .
Rene Jr.
is among the 20,381 Pantawid Pamilya beneficiaries who graduated this school year 2014-2015.
Currently, Northern Mindanao has 271,077 active household beneficiaries of Pantawid Pamilya.

Why do people take up boxing, Why do people take up boxing
Some Filipinos take up boxing for several reasons.
  
Ruth Abbey Gita, Glaiza Jarloc, A SPORT.
A profession.
A fitness regimen.
A method of self-defense.
Boxing can mean different things to different people.
But all of them agree that it goes way beyond climbing a ring, slipping on gloves and unleashing punches.
Take Mark Darell Mendoza.
A boxing instructor for the past four years, 22-year-old Mendoza said the sport gives him a 201chigh201d he2019s never experienced with basketball, volleyball, and taekwondo.
\xa0
Boxing 201cis an exciting sport,  extreme sport for me,201d he said.
\xa0
Before he became a trainer, Mendoza was in his school2019s varsity boxing team and fought in several tournaments.
Early on, he knew the demands of the sport 2013 the intense training the body must endure.
\xa0
201cBefore I entered boxing, I knew it was a dangerous sport,201d he said.
201cYou should be prepared to be hurt.
It is hard to be always injured.
You will sustain bruises in the face, your body will feel pain, but that2019s all part of boxing.201d
The reward comes from victory.

201cEvery time you fight and win, when the referee lifts your arm , it gives you enjoyment,201d he said.

Boxing affected Leo Sarinas in a far different way.
When he took up the sport in 2012, he learned how to control his temper.
201cI became patient.
I stopped cursing,201d Sarinas said.
Like Mendoza, Sarinas competed in the SCUA twice.
 
A trainer for seven years, Paolo Borbe has a practical approach to boxing.

He shares what he has learned through the years and earns money at the same time.
He has around 30 students in a boxing gym in Malolos City, Bulacan.

201cAs a trainer, I want to experience how to teach .
I want to teach to others what needs to be learned.
Just like a business,201d said Borbe.
Boxing used to be an all-male realm.
Not anymore.
\xa0
Rizza Benedicto hits the gym twice a week, pounding the heavy bag or sparring with her trainer.
The 26-year-old Benedicto cited the benefits she has gained from her boxing workouts.
"I discovered that aside from losing weight, I became physically stronger.
I don2019t get tired when I walk up the stairs, I2019ve become more alert,201d she said.
Boxing also relieves stress, she found out.
201cWhen I box, the stress that had accumulated for the week is released,201d she said.
Benedicto said it was not easy for her to get started on boxing, but rigid practice and encouragement from her trainer and her colleagues in the gym gave her the boost she needed.
\xa0
An online writer, Benedicto is trying to get other women to give boxing workouts a try.

"Don2019t get intimidated because it2019s the perfect sport for girls.
It will help develop your stamina, agility, alertness and the bonus is you lose weight," she said.
\xa0
Jillian Fernandez, a 27-year-old student at the Emilio Aguinaldo College in Manila, has been into boxing for more than a year.
\xa0
She said more than a way to develop a healthy body and lifestyle, boxing teaches her techniques to defend herself.
\xa0
201cI'm warning the bad guys: Don2019t mess with me,201d she said.
Boxing is truly a sport for all ages, sizes and gender and even for those who thought they can2019t do it because they are 201csick.201d
\xa0
Gil Vegerano, a newbie when it comes to boxing, said he never thought he could enter into extreme sports because of his asthma.
\xa0
But the 31-year-old said he never had asthma attack since he took up the sport two months ago.
The sensational surge in the popularity of boxing in the Philippines can be attributed to one man: Manny Pacquiao.
Pacquiao, who will reportedly earn at least $120 million from his megafight with unbeaten American Floyd Mayweather Jr.
on Saturday in Las Vegas, Nevada  has no doubt inspired his countrymen to embrace the sport.
Among them is Alvin Malonzo.
Malonzo, 28, said he saw Pacquiao while the ring icon was training in Baguio City years back.

201cMe and my friend marveled at his skill, his body and his strength,201d he said.
201cWe tried to keep up with him as he trained but we gave up.201d
Malonzo also tried basketball and badminton but he said it was boxing that made him lose weight in a short period of time.
201cBoxing is great for cardio fitness,201d he said.

A mother, first of all, A mother, first of allBEING a working mom is no easy task, especially when the mom runs a business aside from being a practicing doctor.
Dr.
Victoria P.
Guillano, who is a dermatologist and dermatopathologist, juggles her time between family and work in an almost day to day basis.
However, she makes it a point to always place family first.
Guillano originally applied for residency training as a pediatrician at the Davao Doctors Hospital because she enjoys working with children.
Then during one of her facial sessions with Dr.
Carlos R.
Pacheco, she was informed that there was an opening at the Department of Dermatology at the Southern Philippines Medical Center .
"Since I had a baby that time, I thought being a dermatologist is much better because it is not a 24-hour job and I can take care of my kid," said Guillano, adding that being in this field allows her to manage her time well between family and work.
During her free time, she enjoys cooking and baking for her family.
She and her husband, Dr.
Frank Guillano, are also very supportive to their children, Nestor, 17, and Franco, 13, who are budding triathletes.
For instance, Guillano and her husband are on a trip to the United States now but once they return to the Philippines in a week, they will immediately go to Dipolog to witness their children compete in a triathlon.
Aside from being an attentive mother and wife, Guillano also juggles her time between clinics.

On Tuesdays and Thursdays she is at the Alexian Brothers and Wellness Center; on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays she is at the Health Science and Wellness Center of the Metro Davao Medical and Research Center; and from Monday to Saturday she is attending to her patients and clients at the DermPath Dermatology, Laser Clinic and MediSPA, her business venture.
Guillano said she started out DermPath after her husband encouraged her to go into business.
"The business was my husband's idea.
He  told me to why not put my passion and practice into business," she said.
What she enjoys most about her job is seeing the happy faces of her clients and patients who she helped improve their beauty and have treated those who have skin diseases.

Since she enjoys working with kids, Guillano said in this job she is able to cater to not only adults but also children.
She said dermatology is not only about cosmetics but it is also about treating those with skin diseases.
Aside from being a doctor and businesswoman, she also juggles her time as president of the Psoriasis Foundation of the Philippines, a lecturer at the Davao Medical School Foundation on dermatology, consultant at the Department of Dermatology at SPMC, and head of the Dermatopathology unit of SPMC.
She is also a fellow and diplomat of the Philippine Dermatological Society, member of the Philippine Dermatological Society, and fellow at the American Academy of Dermatology.
Guillano is also a registered medical technologist and received her baccalaureate degree on medical technology from Velez College and her doctorate in medicine at the Cebu Institute of Medicine.
She had her residency at SPMC and her sub-specialty training on dermatopathology at the National Skin Center in Singapore.

Filipino baker makes life-sized cake of Pacquiao, Filipino baker makes life-sized cake of Pacquiao
Zach Yonzon, owner of The Bunny Baker cafe, poses with the life-sized cake of Filipino boxer Manny Pacquiao Saturday, May 2, 2015 at his bakeshop at suburban Quezon city, northeast of Manila, Philippines.
Yonzon who says he was bored with making traditional cakes sculpted the one-of-a-kind life-sized cake in the image of Pacquiao to mark the Filipino champion2019s megabout with American Floyd Mayweather.
Yonzon, says his wife Aila and six of his staff helped finish the 167-centimeter  chocolate cake of Pacquiao with arms akimbo on Saturday after working 24 hours at the cafe.

MANILA 2014 Fans of Manny Pacquiao have a new way of showing how much they love the boxing superstar 2014 by eating him.
Or a life-size replica cake at least.
Zach Yonzon, his wife Aila, and six of his staff helped finish the 167 cm.
 chocolate cake on Saturday after working 24 hours at The Bunny Baker cafe in suburban Quezon City.
Yonzon says it was his wife's idea to bake the cake to commemorate the mega-fight against Floyd Mayweather, which will be on Sunday morning Philippines time.
"Manny Pacquiao is world class, so we wanted to do something equally world class and the only way to do that is to create a cake that was extraordinary," he said.
The cake will be handed out free to customers and friends of the couple after the fight.
The 41-year-old said the biggest challenges were their lack of experience in making life-size statues and formal training in cake design.
Getting the likeness right was the easy part for Yonzon, who is a graduate of the Philippine High School for the Arts.
"The truth is I get really bored with normal cakes," Yonzon told The Associated Press.
"I wanted really something really, really challenging ...
and a life-sized Manny cake is about as challenging and exciting as the cakes come and this is a perfect opportunity to do that."
"I just needed to do something out of the box," added the former blogger for AOL.
He said he based the image of Pacquiao, including a tattoo of a glove on the boxer's left chest, on pictures available on the Internet.
The cake is built around a wooden frame covered in cling wrap.
He said parts of the head and the arms and the calves were made of Rice Krispies.
"It will be interesting to get people's reactions cutting and eating Manny Pacquiao," he said, laughing.
"My wife said we will start with the torso." 
Duchess of Cambridge gives birth to a princess, Duchess of Cambridge gives birth to a princess
Betting odds are written on a chalkboard outside the Lindo Wing at St.
Mary's Hospital in anticipation of Kate, Duchess Cambridge giving birth to her second child, London, Saturday, May 2, 2015.
Prince William's wife Kate entered a London hospital Saturday to give birth to their second child, igniting a national wave of anticipation and a last-minute betting spree on the name of the new prince or princess.

LONDON  2014 A princess is born.
Prince William's wife, the Duchess of Cambridge, "was safely delivered of a daughter" Saturday morning, less than three hours after checking into St.
Mary's Hospital in London, royal officials said.
The newborn's name wasn't immediately announced.
When her brother, Prince George, was born in 2013, royal officials waited two days before announcing his name.
Britons have for weeks been betting that it would be a princess and all the top bets for the baby's name have been for girls.
Alice and Charlotte are the clear favorites, followed by Elizabeth, Victoria and Diana 2014 all names with strong connections to royal tradition.
Kensington Palace said the baby 2014 the couple's second child 2014 was born at 8:34 a.m.
London time  and weighed 8 pounds 3 ounces .
The princess is fourth in line to the throne and the fifth great-grandchild of Queen Elizabeth II.
A royal statement said senior royals "are delighted with the news." The queen marked the occasion by wearing a pink ensemble while carrying out an official engagement in Richmond, North Yorkshire, 250 miles  north of London.
Die-hard royal fans who had been camping for days outside the hospital danced with delight, chanting "Princess! Princess!" and "Hip, hip, hooray!" A town crier in elaborate costume 2014 with no connection to the royal family 2014 shouted out the news at the hospital's door, clanging his bell to welcome the new royal.
"May our princess be long-lived, happy and glorious," said Tony Appleton, reading from a scroll in a booming voice.
Later, hundreds of tourists and well-wishers crowded outside the gates of Buckingham Palace, cheering and screaming as officials placed a traditional birth announcement on a golden easel.
Kate, 33, and her infant were doing well, and Prince William was present for the birth, officials said.
Kate, who wed William in April 2011, gave birth to Prince George at the same hospital in July 2013.
William came out of the hospital in the afternoon, waving to reporters and saying he was "very happy" before driving off to see about George.
Anticipation for the occasion had been building for weeks.
Kate had told a well-wisher earlier this year that the child was due in the second two weeks of April, kicking off what the tabloid press called "the Great Kate Wait." The world's media had set up their positions outside the hospital for days, but were still caught slightly off guard by the speed with which officials announced the birth.
"I'm top of the world," said royal camper Terry Hutt, 80, decked out in patriotic Union Jack gear.
He said he did not expect the birth to happen as soon as it did, but said: "Babies come when they're ready."
"If Diana was here, she'd be very, very proud," he added, referring to the late Princess Diana, William's mother.
Britain's political leaders 2014 facing a hard-fought general election in just five days 2014 rushed to congratulate the couple on the new addition.
Prince Charles had signaled 2014 twice 2014 that he was hoping for a granddaughter, which led some to speculate that he had inside information, even though the royal couple said throughout Kate's pregnancy that they did not know the child's gender.
The monarchy has not welcomed a princess born this high up the line of succession since Princess Anne, the queen's second child, was born in 1950.
Princesses Beatrice and Eugenie, the daughters of Prince Andrew and Sarah Ferguson, were fifth and sixth in line at the time of their birth.
At 21 months, George is third in line to the throne, after his grandfather Prince Charles and William.
The newborn becomes the fourth in line, bumping Uncle Harry to fifth place.
Thanks to a recent change in law, the new princess will hold her place in the line of succession that for centuries had put boys ahead of their sisters.
The change means that no younger brother will be able to overtake the newborn princess in the order of preference to inherit the throne.
Nonetheless, the princess should not have to worry about one day becoming queen.
Royal succession rules dictate that the throne always passes to the eldest child, and younger siblings only get to step up to the job in rare circumstances 2014 in the cases of an illness, death, or abdication.
The public is likely to get its first view of the newborn when Kate and William leave the hospital, but no time has been set for that yet.

Van Gogh work fetches over $66 million at New York auction , Van Gogh work fetches over $66 million at New York auction 
Vincent van Gogh's The Allee of Alyscamps 
NEW YORK  2014 A painting Vincent van Gogh created while briefly working side by side with his friend Paul Gauguin in the south of France brought in $66.3 million at auction Tuesday.
"The Allee of Alyscamps" was offered at Sotheby's impressionist and modern art sale.
The autumnal scene was painted in 1888 during a two-month period when van Gogh and Gauguin worked together in Arles, France.
The painting, which had a presale estimate of more than $40 million, was sold to an Asian private collector, Sotheby's said.
The auction record for a van Gogh, who died in 1890, is $82.5 million.
Van Gogh expert Clifford Edwards, a professor at Virginia Commonwealth University, said, "To have a canvas from Arles by that very self-taught artist at the height of his work marks the sale as momentous."
The sale also featured six paintings spanning four decades of Claude Monet's career.
The highlight was "Water Lilies," a 1905 version of his beloved pond and gardens at his home in Giverny, France.
It fetched $54 million, topping its high presale estimate of $45 million.
Monet's 1908 painting of Venice with a view of the Palazzo Ducale on the Grand Canal fetched more than $23 million.
It was confiscated by the Nazis from the noted collector Jakob Goldschmidt and was reclaimed by his son in 1960.
It descended to a grandson, who died last year.
The current auction record for a work by Monet is his 1919 "Water Lily Pond," which sold for $80.5 million in 2008.
Sotheby's also offered works from two prominent single-owner collections.
There were two works from Hollywood film moguls Samuel Goldwyn and his son.
"Woman With a Chignon in an Armchair," a portrait of Pablo Picasso's lover Francoise Gilot, sold for $29.9 million, almost doubling its high presale estimate of $18 million.
It depicts her in an embroidered jacket Picasso bought for her in Poland while she was pregnant with their child.
Henri Matisse's "Anemones and Pomegranates" was purchased by the elder Goldwyn two years after it was painted in 1948.
It sold for more than $6 million, in line with its presale estimate.
About two dozen other works from the collection will be offered in a series of sales later in May, June and October.
Samuel Goldwyn Jr.
died in January; his father died in 1974.
The other collection on Tuesday belonged to Jerome Stone, a Chicago businessman and founder of the Alzheimer's Association, who died in January.
It included Fernand Leger's "The Blue Wheel, Definitive State," with a pre-sale estimate of up to $12 million.
It fetched $10.5 million.
Other artists in the collection included Joan Miro, Marc Chagall and Alberto Giacometti.

Philippine Embassy in Malaysia concludes tour, Philippine Embassy in Malaysia concludes tour
Ambassador's Tour participants
CEBU -- The Philippine Embassy in Kuala Lumpur successfully concluded its 2nd Ambassador2019s Tour to the Philippines, leading 121 tour participants around the islands of Bohol and Cebu.
After a successful tour of Manila, Tagaytay, and Villa Escudero in 2014, the much-awaited tour came back even better with more activities and more chances to enjoy the beautiful, blue waters of the archipelago.
201cThis year, we have an even better itinerary for the Ambassador2019s Tour as we have a common theme -- activities on water,201d Philippine Ambassador to Malaysia J.
Eduardo Malaya said.
201cThis manifests the culture and tradition of Filipinos as an archipelagic people.
The seas and the water do not separate us.
They connect us,201d he added.
After appreciating heritage sites in Cebu such as the Magellan Shrine and seeing how the famous Cebu guitars and fashion accessories are made in their respective factories, the tour group went island hopping in Cebu.
Tour participants boarded open-air, motorized bancas  that took them to Nalusuan Island -- a marine sanctuary in Cebu with crystal blue waters.
They were also able to feed fish and go snorkeling near Hilutungan Island.
In Bohol, the tour group enjoyed lunch while on a cruise along the Loboc River.
They also met the world2019s second smallest primate, and got to appreciate the unique geological formation that is the Chocolate Hills.
In true Filipino fashion, every meal can be described as a feast with lots of the islands2019 famous sea food -- lobsters, crabs, prawns -- and local delicacies such as the sour soup called Sinigang, the Filipino salad called Ensalada, and the sweet Banana Cue for dessert.
Ambassador Malaya was quick to point out how Cebu and Bohol have been boosting Halal tourism in the area by helping increase the number of Halal-certified food establishments on the island.

The tour group2019s significant number of Muslim participants got their fill of Filipino dishes without worrying about their dietary restrictions.

201cWith Halal tourism on the rise and the increase of air connectivity between Kuala Lumpur and the various island destinations of the Philippines, there are now more reasons for Malaysians to choose the Philippines for their next vacation,201d Ambassador Malaya said.
201cWe are even working on getting more tourists to fly directly to their island destinations without having to change planes.201d
The 2nd Ambassador2019s Tour2019s aim was to re-introduce the Philippines to Malaysians and other nationalities who joined the tour as a complete tropical, heritage, cultural, and eco-tourism experience.
With Cebu and Bohol2019s heritage sites, beautiful waters, and unique geological formations, the tour left the participants looking yearning for more of what the Philippines has to offer.
For a taste of Filipino and Asean art, the participants also attended the opening of an art exhibit in Cebu2019s Qube Gallery where 25 artists from the Philippines, Indonesia, and Malaysia showed their latest works at an art show entitled Kita.
Zainol Abidin Mohamed, one of the tour2019s participants and a second-timer for the Ambassador2019s Tour, said he cannot wait to go back.
201cAfter enjoying the first Ambassador2019s Tour, I decided to bring my family with me.
I booked for 16 people for this tour and we all enjoyed it 2013 my wife, my children, and even my cousin2019s family,201d he said.
He noted how this year2019s tour is even much more extensive with more activities than the first.
He added that he has also been recommending the Ambassador2019s Tour to his friends due to its carefully planned itinerary, reasonable cost, and convenience.

In 2014, the year the Ambassador2019s Tour started, the Philippines enjoyed a 27 percent growth on the arrival of Malaysian tourists compared to the year before with 139,000 Malaysians visiting the islands.
This is the highest and most significant growth rate from the Philippines2019 major tourist markets that catapulted Malaysia into the 9th spot of the country2019s top 10 tourist markets.
201cDefinitely, we would like to see more international tourist arrivals to the Philippines 2013 especially in Bohol and Cebu where the people are greatly involved in sustainable tourism,201d Ambassador Malaya said.
201cThis is their way of life and that2019s one of the reasons why they take good care of their environment and it is something that should be appreciated.201d
With the clamor of tour participants for a 3rd Ambassador2019s Tour, Ambassador Malaya and Department of Tourism Representative Datin Melissa Ong promised to plan and make the next one even better than the first two.

Will it be Batanes? Boracay? Palawan? Or one of the 7,107 islands that has not yet made it to the consciousness of mainstream travelers?
Ambassador Malaya coyly replied that participants2019 reaction to the tour is indeed giving them pressure with regard to planning the next one.
But he promised that people will definitely be even more excited once the official announcement for the tour2019s next destination is made.

LEADavao: Search for achievers, LEADavao: Search for achieversTHE Davao Jaycee Senate launched last April 29 the LEADavao, an undertaking that seeks to recognize outstanding achievements of Filipinos aged 35 and above that have benefited the Davao City community.
The awards program gives focus on the Jaycees goal and mission of providing opportunities that empower people to create positive change.
Through awarding achievers, Davao Jaycees believe this will motivate, inspire and recognize persons who have demonstrated vigor and enterprise in tackling the problems of society and implementing solutions.
JCI Senate Davao Resident is Sen.
Jocy Tagle-Ledesma.
 Project chairman is Sen.
Nick Partoza.

Nominations are now open and deadline for nominations is on or before July 1, 2015.
LEADavao was originally launched in 2003 under the presidency of Sen.
Manuel M.
Orig.
Project chair was Sen.
Nilo Claudio.
 The awardees were Carolyn Arguillas, Margie Moran-Floirendo, Joji Ilagan-Bian, Joey Ayala and Antonio T.
Uy.
Criteria are: The nominee must have reached the age of 35 at the time of filing of his/her nomination; the nominee must be a resident of Davao City for at least one year at the time of the filing of his/her nomination; the nominee must have made substantive and meaningful contributions to the upliftment and well-being of the Davao City community, and the nominee must not be a past LEADavao awardee.
Rules Governing Submission of Nomination:
1.
Nomination for the LEADavao Award is open to an individual engaged in any field of endeavor.
Any person or organization can nominate one or more individuals subject to the requirements outlined in this document.
2.
Nominations should be made on the prescribed LEADavao nomination form and notarized accordingly.
All information therein shall be submitted in English, Tagalog or Taglish.
3.
THE Nominee must sign the nomination form attesting to all stated facts therein; giving consent to an independent body for the verification by the LEADavao Search Committee and the subsequent publication of said facts; and indicating his/her willingness to attend the awards ceremonies, if selected.
4.
A certified true copy of the nominee2019s birth certificate or any equivalent proof of date and place of birth should accompany nomination.
5.
Two  copies of nominee2019s picture  black and white or colored, should accompany the two  copies of the accomplished Nomination Form.
Also, pictures must be submitted in digital form stored in USB.
6.
A one page Executive Summary of the Nominee summarizing important facts and accomplishments and presented in a scrapbook shall accompany the nomination form.
7.
The Scrapbook/ Bidbook in digital form shall be subject to the specifications as indicated in the technical requirements for attachments.
8.
The Nominee/Nominator must submit a CD/ USB with contents as follows: Duly filled up Nomination Form, scanned copies of each page of the scrapbook saved as Pdf file, and a "52019x72019"picture of the nominee.
9.
An original or certified true copy of the nominee2019s NBI Clearance should also accompany the nomination.
10.
All entries must be e-mailed to leadavao2015@yahoo.com and   personally delivered to Annipie Cinnamon Outlets on or before July 1, 2015.
Mailed entries should be postmarked not later than the same date.
11.
The LEADavao Search Committee of the JCI Senate Davao shall be the search body of the project and reserves the right to pass judgment on any issue that may arise in connection with the above rules.
12.
The LEADavao Search Committee will review the entries to ensure that all technical requirements are complied with.
13.
The Screening Committee shall conduct a preliminary selection of the nominees to determine the finalists for consideration by the Board of Judges.
14.
The Board of Judges composed of respected individuals shall select the winners.
Their decision will be final and non- appealable.
They may opt to call the finalist for an interview as they deem fit.
15.
All data/information submitted in connection with the LEADavao AWARD shall be treated with the strictest confidentiality and shall become the property of the LEADavao AWARD BODY of the Davao Jaycee Senate.
Procedure in Making Bidbooks for the Nominees
As part of the scrapbook, the nominator must answer the following questions about the nominee on a separate sheet.
Indicate by number where each answer begins.
Answers must be printed, double 2013 spaced on standard
A4 or letter-size bond paper.
Be as brief and factual as possible.
1.
Describe the career of the nominee.
Please include background, scope of nominee2019s work or activity and the resources utilized in achieving his/her goals.
2.
Narrate the nominee2019s substantive contributions which has led to the upliftment and well-being of the Davao City community.
3.
List quotations, statements of authorities, honors and awards received which are indicative of the nominee2019s achievements and contributions.
4.
Summarize how the nominee has exemplified one or more of the following tenets of the JCI Creed:
That faith in God gives meaning and purpose to human life;
That the brotherhood of man transcends the sovereignty of nations;
That economic justice can best be won by free men through free enterprise;
That government should be of laws rather than of men;
That earth2019s great treasure lies in human personality; and
That service to humanity is the best work of life.
Celebrating Mother2019s Day, Celebrating Mother2019s DayANNA JARVIS established the Mother's Day in honor of her mother2019s legacy; the late president Corazon Aquino, the mother of our country2019s present chief executive and the icon of the historical People Power revolution; Raja Weksler saved her daughter and other people during the holocaust; Cleopatra who was known for her expertise in tactical mothering; our mothers and your mothers who brought us into this world after the tough nine months of conception.
They are some, but few of the great people known and adored.
They are all Eve2019s descendants and above all mothers.
When 1994 Miss Universe Sushmita Sen was asked in her final question on the essence of a woman, she answered, 201c2026The origin of a child is a mother, and is a woman.
She shows a man what sharing, caring and loving is all about2026201d
Today, the world honors all the mothers in the world regardless of race, gender, and religion.
Everyone has his or her way of celebrating Mother2019s day.
Each family has its own style of making the day great, exceptional and blissful beyond doubt for mothers.
With the spirit up in today2019s mother2019s day celebration, Kagay-anons are now ready to celebrate this special day to praise and show gratitude for the all the constant love and support of one of the women who has the greatest impact on many people2019s lives 2013 our mothers.
Mothers all over the world must have been up and will be waking up with surprises from their loved ones, communities, offices, and organizations.
 
Others must have heard countless 201cthank you201d and 201cI love you.201d They must have been getting kisses, hugs, flowers, gifts, candies or treats to breakfast, lunch or dinner.
 
Lourdes Montil, 49, a mother of four children and a mango float and ice candy vendor said, 201cHappy mi sa among pamilya.
Padad-an gihapon ko nila ug mga letter nga 2018Ma, Happy mother2019s day.2019 Mo-simba mi sa among pamilya ug magluto-luto pud mi ginagmay sa balay, magluto ug pagkaon.201d  still send me letter with  2018Ma happy mother2019s day.2019 We go to church and we cook in our house.) When asked how she feels about it, she replied: 201cLipay kaayo ko kay mother2019s day baya.
Unya love nako ako mga anak.201d 
Another hardworking mother, Tessie Jumawan, 44, a mother of one and a candy and cigarette vendor, said 201cNaa man gyud na sya nga celebration pero layo man gud ang amo.
Then, magtawag-tawag nalang ko sa ahong mama.
E-greet nalang naho.
Then, ako anak magbonding-bonding mi.
Magtapok mi tanan, akong apo then naa dayon ako anak  is far.
Then, I just call my mother and greet her.
And we have bonding with my child.
We gather together with my grandchildren and child.) When asked how happy she is whenever it2019s mother2019s day, she exclaimed enthusiastically, 201cDili masulod ug sako ang kalipay .201d
201cWala mi preparations or plans para sa Mother2019s day.
Naanad na pud mi ug si mama ,201d answered Norebhel and Jane Rose Basadre of Sugbongcogon town in Misamis Oriental when asked about their preparations and plans for Mother2019s day.
The most excited group, as it seems, for this celebration are the children who are very much eager to dote on their mothers.
Stephanie Eunice Lucena, a grade 4 student of South City Central School, said that for Mother2019s Day, she has already made plans with her papa and other siblings 201cto surprise mama on Sunday by giving her flowers and going out to eat together.201d
The others, like Joseff Abbas, grade 6, said he intended to thank his mom by giving her handmade thank you cards which he and his siblings planned to make.
 
Chelsea Angeles, a student of Liceo de Cagayan University, already posted on her Facebook timeline, an album of her and her mom as she was growing up and said that it was 201cmy tribute to mom for supporting me all the way.201d  
On the other hand, husbands are also on the move to honor the effort and love of their wives in caring for their children and family.
Edmond Velasco, 43, a motorela driver said he would is surprise his wife by 201cmaybe cooking for her and greeting her together with our children.201d
Dolores Galinato, 49, a mother of five, would simply celebrate it with her family.
201cIt doesn2019t matter if we do not go to expensive places and do so many things, all that matter is that we are together and we are happy.201d
Lucy Yorong, 55, a business woman, is intending to spend Mother2019s Day by going to church and offering her thanks to the Lord for a complete and grateful family.
Commercialized
Others, on the contrary, do not share these same sentiments about Mother2019s Day.
Samentha Dante, 46, said that she and her family do not celebrate Mother2019s Day because they think that 201cMother2019s Day is just a much commercialized way of reminding people to continue lavishing all the mothers with so much love every day.
On this Mother2019s day, always remember that the greatest thing that one can give is time.
Use it to express your deepest appreciation for the woman who never for a single minute gives up on the great person that you are.
 
Masbad: Of charts and user interfaces, Masbad: Of charts and user interfacesRoark L.
Masbad, Wacky Tech, WE ALL have made presentations at some point.
We needed it for school or for work.
We needed to present data to an audience and this audience needed to be able to grasp the data and understand it.
In most cases, we create charts to present these data sets.
Charts make for a more visual and creative way of presenting data.

Here2019s an infographic that could prove useful for you when you2019re out to create charts.

by michelleink88.



And when it comes to interfacing with your users, whether it be for an app or a website, a few commandments won2019t hurt as much to follow.




Advocate against human trafficking , Advocate against human trafficking Ruji Peter S.
Abat, DIFFERENT learning opportunities at the Davao Regional Prosecutor's Office enabled Prosecutor Karl Andre Salcedo to be a staunch advocate against human trafficking.
Salcedo told Sun.Star Davao in an interview that his expectation from the prosecution service was not initially met when he was appointed as an associate prosecution attorney in 2013.

He thought that his job would be just like any other prosecutor who is faced with voluminous complaints to resolve and a lot of court trials to attend to.
"At first, I was expecting na akong trabaho kay magresolve ug case ug daghang trial works.
Pero more of admin ug managerial work diay akong trabaho kay ang RPO-11 man ang representative sa Department of Justice  on the regional level.
So ginapadala ko sa mga forums, speaking engagements ug lain pang mga conferences nga naay concern sa DOJ ," Salcedo said.
This opportunity has allowed Salcedo to grow not only as a prosecutor but as a well-rounded public servant, citing he has to go to every conference or forum prepared while he was also tasked to become acting prosecutor for different city and provincial prosecution offices in the region.
"It is a great opportunity for me to develop my admin and managerial skills and it is good that I am not confined in the court room or office.
Basically, our work is diverse and this has trained me to become more flexible," Salcedo said.
It was then when he became part of the Regional Anti-Trafficking Task Force -Davao that he found his passion in campaigning against human trafficking saying, "I have a soft spot for people who are suffering and when I joined the task force, it opened up a realization that a lot of trafficking victims need help.
So then it became my advocacy."
Salcedo has then conducted talks in various anti-trafficking in persons campaigns and forums and has also aided in investigating and building cases against suspected human traffickers.
But he said that his expectations on the prosecution service came full circle when he was allowed by RPO-11 head Regional Prosecutor Antonio Arellano to handle human trafficking cases.
"I am very grateful to RP Arellano for allowing me to handle trafficking cases because trial work was among the things I was expecting when I decided to join the prosecution service.
But it has become more fulfilling now since it is aligned with my advocacy to help human trafficking victims," Salcedo said.
Latest self-driving Google car heading to public streets, Latest self-driving Google car heading to public streets
In this May 13, 2015 photo, Google's new self-driving prototype car is presented during a demonstration at the Google campus in Mountain View, Calif.
The car, which needs no gas pedal or steering wheel, will make its debut on public roads this summer.

MOUNTAIN VIEW, Calif.
2014 The latest version of Google's self-driving car 2014 a pod-like two-seater that needs no gas pedal or steering wheel 2014 will make its debut on public roads this summer, a significant step in the technology giant's mission to have driverless cars available to consumers in the next five years.
This prototype is the first vehicle built from scratch for the purpose of self-driving, Google says.
It looks like a Smart car with a shiny black bowler hat to hide its sensors, and it can drive, brake and recognize road hazards without human intervention.
It has more capabilities than the prototype Google introduced last May, which was so rudimentary it had fake headlights.
The new pod isn't designed for a long trip, or a joyride.
It lacks air bags and other federally required safety features, so it can't go more than 25 miles per hour .
It's electric, and has to be recharged after 80 miles .
And the pod can only drive in areas that have been thoroughly mapped by Google.
At first, it will likely even have a steering wheel and gas pedal 2014 current California regulations require them.
Those regulations also require a driver to be able to take back control of the car at any time.
But Google is lobbying for more flexible regulations.
Google will initially build and test 25 pods, mostly in neighborhoods surrounding its Mountain View headquarters.
It will eventually build between 50 and 100, and will broaden testing to sites that are hillier and rainier.
The ultimate goal, says Google co-founder Sergey Brin, is computer-controlled cars that can eliminate human error, which is a factor in an estimated 90 percent of the 1.2 million road deaths that occur worldwide each year.
Self-driving cars could also improve traffic congestion and transport the elderly and disabled.
Google shocked the auto industry in 2010 with its announcement that it was working on a driverless car.
Brin insists Google doesn't aspire to be a car company, but wants its technology to be adopted by automakers.
"We want to partner to bring self-driving to all the vehicles in the world," Brin told a group of journalists and community members gathered earlier this week to take rides in the prototype.
Convincing drivers that driverless technology is safe is one of the hurdles the company must overcome.
Earlier this week, in response to questions from The Associated Press, Google acknowledged 11 minor accidents in the six years it has been testing autonomous cars.
Urmson says the company is proud of that record, and notes that Google's vehicles have completed more than 1.7 million miles of testing.
He says all but one of the accidents were caused by drivers in other cars; in the only incident caused by a Google car, a staffer was driving in manual mode.
Consumers question whether they can trust self-driving cars to work all the time, who will be liable if there's an accident and how self-driving cars will interact with regular cars, says the consulting firm J.D.
Power and Associates.
In a 2013 survey of U.S.
drivers, J.D.
Power found only one in five was interested in a fully autonomous car.
Egil Juliussen, the principal analyst of infotainment and advanced driver assist systems for the consulting firm IHS Automotive, says Google's "moon shot" strategy is difficult and riskier than just adding features to existing cars.
But he thinks it could ultimately be successful.
Google could make self-driving urban pods for universities or urban centers, for example, or sell its technology to automakers.

Exploring arts and talents, Exploring arts and talents
Photo from Tambayan Center for Children's Rights Inc.'s Facebook page
Kriztja Marae G.
Labrador, WITH art known as an outlet in expressing thoughts and emotions, the Tambayan Center for Children2019s Rights had recently conducted a summer workshop for street girls from the different barangays in Davao and Digos City.
The 3-day workshop dubbed as the 201cSummer Integrated Art Workshops201d aims to 201clet every child understand and appreciate their own craft.201d
Tambayan is a non-government organization working with less privileged and discriminated adolescent girls in the street with ages ranging from 9 to 17 years old.
The workshop was held at DCG inland resort in Toril last Tuesday and Wednesday and a culmination activity was held at Tambayan Center along Artiagastreet to showcase the children2019s output.

Tambayan psychosocial worker  LouiseSuamen said that the participants can choose among three disciplines for the workshop: theater, music and visual arts.
The children were taught by renowned artists namely Toni Apat for theater, PopongLandero for music and Mai Ongkiko for visual arts.
Suamen said that there are 29 girls serviced by their organization who participated in the workshop.
She added that these girls are mostly members of gangs, involved in vices and victims of physical and sexual abuses.
201cKini sila nanginahanglan ug maayong proteksyon pud ug pagtagad ,201d Suamen said.
During their recital, other than their enhanced skills, all of their experiences, hopes and aspirations were also highlighted in each performance and artwork that they have shown.
Leslie, one of the girls under the theater workshop, said that it had develop their confidence to show what they have been through.
201cSa theater nakatuon ko naipakita ang mga nakit-an nako ug ma-acting nako, mapasinati nako sa ubang mga kabatan-unan unsa among kaagi ug unsa among naagihan ,201d she said.
For music, other than learning to play some instruments, Sweet and Marbie had composed their own song which pictures their dream of being successful in life.
An excerpt from their song goes: 201cBabangon sa pagkadapa sa bisyo at kasamaan, mabubuhay ng marangal dahil sa akin ay may nagmamahal2026magagawa ko ang lahat ng gusto ko, kung matutupad ang mga pangarap ko.201d
A part of Tambayan2019s office was also turned into a mini art exhibit area for children under the visual arts workshop to display their artworks filled with bright colors and fun patterns.
Some artworks also have motivational words on them such as 201cdon2019t give up.201d
Suamen said that those participating girls who will be interested to join in more training will be included as members of Nakamata .
According to her, as of April, they are looking after 178 adolescent girls while there are currently 73 members for Nakamata.
Suamen said that other than enhancing the children2019s skills on their chosen art disciplines, they are also hoping for the children to use art as a tool to participate in advocating their rights especially to other children in their areas.

Apple updates MacBook Pro, cuts price on high-end iMac, Apple updates MacBook Pro, cuts price on high-end iMac
In this Sept.
5, 2014 file photo, a man walks into an Apple store in Beijing.
Apple on Tuesday, May 19, 2015 introduced an updated MacBook Pro and iMac and lowering the price for its top-end iMac.
The updated 15-inch MacBook Pro laptop has a new style of trackpad, faster flash storage and a longer battery life and starts at $1,999.

NEW YORK 2014 Apple is introducing an updated MacBook Pro and iMac and lowering the price for its top-end iMac.
The updated 15-inch MacBook Pro laptop has a new style of trackpad, faster flash storage and a longer battery life and starts at $1,999.
The new $1,999 iMac desktop computer has a higher-resolution 27-inch screen and faster processor.
Apple's top-end iMac will now sell for $2,299.
It has been selling for $2,499 at some retail outlets.
The news comes ahead of Apple's worldwide developers conference June 8.

OFWs are top buyers, OFWs are top buyersRuji Peter S.
Abat, OVERSEAS Filipino workers are top real estate property buyers in Davao City, said chief of the Plans and Programs Division of the Office of the City Planning and Development Coordinator Engr.
Jose Froilan Rigor.
"OFWs have occupied or have purchased around half of the houses and lots of the top property developers in the city," Rigor said.
He added that businessmen have also been considered among the top buyers, followed by foreigners, retirees and young professionals.
Rigor also said investors continue to invest on Davao City lands for development projects with a growing market.
Rigor said property developers, particularly residential, industrial and commercial land developers, have been the top investors of real estate properties in Davao City.
These developers would either develop subdivisions, condominium and walls while some would develop factories and other industrial spaces.
But Rigor underscored the growing trend of township development, saying: "Townships are self-contained communities and pwedeng maglagay ang mga property developers ng residential, commercial and industrial spaces.
Ang trend is really towards that and that is good because the city wants to decongest the core of the urban centers."
He added that township development can help decongest the downtown areas as residents of Davao City can settle within their own community rather than travelling to downtown.
This, too, according to him, could alleviate the problem on the so-called rush-hour syndrome.
Rigor attributes the growth of the real estate industry in the city to the peace and order situation, governance and feats that the city has acquired through the years.
"We are already established as one of the safest cities in the world and we were also awarded as the most child-friendly city in the county.
We have also passed many ordinances relating to our security and on top of that we have a relatively cheap cost of living here while our water is one of the best qualities in the world," Rigor said.
He added, "These are the reasons why many developers are confident on investing here.
So when there are more developed properties, the number of consumers also grows and we are expecting this growth to be rapid for the coming years."
Comfy condo living in style, Comfy condo living in styleReuel John F.
Lumawag, 
LEADING property developer, DMC Urban Property Developers Inc.
, introduced condominium living to Dabawenyos in 2003 with their Ecoland 4000 Residences in Ecoland, Davao City.
In 2014, DMC-UPDI launched its latest condo project in Davao City, Verdon Parc, which will rise in a three-hectare property and will be composed of four buildings with a combined 888 units.

Building one and four will have 162 units each while building three and four will have 282 units each.
Merly Q.
Amoguis, officer-in-charge and sales and marketing coordinator for Davao City, said that Building one is now 70 percent complete and is expected to be completed structurally by December this year and the turnover will be in June 2016.
She said they expect to construct the second building that is targeted to commence by the third quarter of this year.
Verdon Parc has eight types of units.

Unit A is a 28.50-square-meter  inner unit with one bedroom ; Unit B is 52.63 sqm.
two-bedroom inner unit ; Unit C is a 57.5 sqm.
unit with two bedroom and two toilets and bathrooms ; Unit D is a 57 sqm.
middle unit with two bedrooms, one toilet and bathroom and balcony .
Unit C is a 66 sqm.
end unit with balcony, two bedrooms, and two toilets and bathrooms ; Unit F is a 57 sqm.
inner unit with two bedrooms and one toilet and bathroom ; Unit G is a 94.5 sqm.
unit with three bedrooms, two toilets and bathrooms, garden, and balcony ; and Unit H is an 85.50 sqm.
inner unit with three bedrooms, two toilets and bathrooms, garden and balcony .
Each building will also feature a lobby, lounge, concierge, mailbox room, CCTV security cameras, backup power supply, single loaded corridors, central atrium with cross ventilation, two passenger elevators, automatic fire protection sprinkler system and fire alarm system, roof deck drying cages, overhead water tank, and garbage room.
Amoguis said they have allotted one hectare for the amenities including swimming pools -- lap pool, leisure pool, and kiddie pool; gazebo, cabanas, covered basketball and badminton courts, children's playground, open field with interactive art and fitness park, trellis covered path, garden promenade, carwash stations, drop-off lobby areas, pocket gardens, and landscaped areas.
Indoor amenities include lobby and lounge areas, concierge, multi-purpose hall, function room, fitness gym, multi-purpose fitness room, game room, concessionaire shops, property management office, security and maintenance room, and a wifi zone.
The condominium project also features two main entrances, perimeter fence, 24-hour security with CCTV cameras and RFID system at vehicle entrance, underground electrical facilities, and sewage treatment plant.
Amoguis said with Verdon Parc, future homeowners can be assured of quality living.
Rising towers, Rising towersReuel John F.
Lumawag, THE skyline of Davao City 10 years ago can be characterized by a mix of mid-rise and low-rise buildings with 18-storey Marco Polo Hotel Davao being the tallest back then.
A few years later, Pryce Tower and Landco Pacific Building at the Pryce Business Park were established adding to the changes in the skyline of the city.
In the past four to five years, more mid-rise buildings, mostly of which were residentials, began to rise and continue to change Davao City's landscape.
However, in the coming years, Dabawenyos can expect the skyline of Davao City to drastically change once the high-rise projects of large property developers are completed.
Evidently, among the first tall buildings that will dominate the skyline of the city are the Abreeza Place and Abreeza Residences, which are projects of Alveo Land in partnership with Accendo Commercial Corp.
Both buildings are nearing completion.
Another set of high-rise towers that are also under construction are the Avida Towers Davao, along C.M.
Recto Ave.
 of Avida Land, in partnership with Avencosouth Corp.
When you pass by the area, you can see the busy construction workers working together to put up the building.
Up north, property giant Megaworld is also pouring P15 million for the development of the Davao Park District, a joint venture modern township project with the Dakudao Family, in an 11-hectare  property in Lanang that will feature residential condominiums, business process outsourcing centers and commercial centers.
The first structure to rise in the area is the P1.2-billion 16-storey steel and glass Davao Finance Center , which is expected to be Mindanao's first world-class facility for business process outsourcing  industry.
It is targeted to be completed by 2016.

Suntrust Properties Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of Megaworld, is also constructing the One Lakeshore Drive, a four-tower residential condominium cluster that will rise at the 7.2 hectares residential area of DPD, in 2016.
Each tower will be 21-storey high.
These are just some of the projects being developed by Manila-based property developers though there are also those that are currently being developed like the 33 storey Aeon Towers of the FTC Group of Companies Corp.
while Felcris Hotels and Resorts Corp.
 is set to construct three 38-storey tower condominiums at Felcris Centrale.
Davao City Investment Promotion Center  officer-in-charge Ivan C.
Cortez said the construction boom due to the entry of these projects is an indicator of a strong economic activity in the city.
He said that business activities brought about by the construction boom will attract other investors who would want to grab the opportunity to invest in Davao City.
Cortez said the strong growth of real property development in Davao City was triggered by the entry of property developers who invested in the city early like Sta.
Lucia Land Inc.
and Ayala Land.
Other developers came in after them.
For his part, Davao City Chamber of Commerce and Industry Inc.
 president Antonio T.
dela Cruz said the changing landscape of Davao City could also be attributed to the local government unit's  efficiency in running the city.
"Businessmen really believe in the LGU and at the same time they have seen Davao, as far as Mindanao is concerned, the regional center," he said, adding that the growth of the city has also attracted investors.
"Indeed investors keep on coming to Davao and there will be a continuous change in landscape because we will now see high rise buildings," dela Cruz added.
Land development in full blast at Camella Davao, Land development in full blast at Camella DavaoWITHIN the surging real estate development north of Davao City, Camella's latest master-planned subdivision, Camella Davao, will soon start taking shape with land development currently in full blast.
 
Camella Davao will be sprawled over 27 hectares of prime land in Communal, Buhangin across the Davao International Airport, offering the best residential address to those who want to live within the emerging growth area of north Davao.
Its strategic location makes it proximate to the city's shopping district, business and commercial hub, and public utilities such as public transportation available immediately outside the subdivision.
 
Within few kilometers are public markets, hospitals, malls, schools and universities, places of worship, and terminals to outlying provinces.
  
Set over a relatively rolling terrain, Camella Davao will bear a distinct design and color derived from an interesting mix of European and Western influences, setting it apart from other residential communities.
 Set within a verdant location, it offers an ambiance replete with lush surroundings, fresh air, and a laid-back atmosphere.
As in all other Camella communities, Camella Davao will have deluxe facilities and amenities such as a clubhouse, swimming pool, ball courts, kiddie playground, pocket gardens, and round-the-clock security.
 It will also have community facilities such as parks, recreational areas, jobbing trail, tree nurseries, and wide open spaces, and a grand entrance gate will lead to tree-lined avenues with landscaped grounds.
This Caribbean-inspired subdivision is a large-scale development with Camella's most diverse package yet.
From high-end homes ensconced within enclaves, to affordable stylish and functional homes, Camella Davao's home prices are easily within reach.
 
Now homebuyers can acquire their dream Camella home, allowing them to fulfill their aspiration of living in a beautiful home and enjoy Camella's charming lifestyle.
This latest addition to Camella's master planned communities in the region will also have its own village center that will feature coffee shops, supermarket, retail shops, clinics, terminal, among others.
The village center will make the community a self-sustaining township, making living in Camella Davao exciting and fulfilling.
Camella Davao levels up Davao's livability factor with its exquisite homes and charming lifestyle set within the city's vibrant landscape.
Best of all, its affordability makes it accessible to homebuyers who wish to belong to one of the most preferred residential locations in the country.
Camella Davao is another landmark development of the premier developer Camella, a subsidiary of the country's largest homebuilder, Vista Land & Lifescapes.
More information is available at the Camella offices at Delgar Bldg.
, JP Laurel Avenue, Bajada, Davao City or at telephone number 226-3100.

Rent or buy?, Rent or buy?Marianne L.
Saberon-Abalayan, INCOME stability, or lack of it, is one major consideration before one decides to rent or buy a house.
Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas  Bank Officer 2 Maricel Fuentes Felix said, "It all depends on the current income.
For a young married couple, it's okay to rent a small space with a reasonable rental cost while saving up for equity on a new house and lot  or when they are financially able to amortize for long-term like when availing a Pag-Ibig housing loan."
Since income is vital in measuring one's capability and eligibility to apply for a housing loan, an applicant must consider security of tenure of his or her employment or sustainability of his or her business since most terms of housing loans span from 20 to 30 years.
"If you have the money, buy a house.
Monthly rent of houses in downtown areas usually range from P5,000 to P10,000.
With that amount, you can already amortize for your own housing unit," Felix said in the vernacular.
However, she noted that some don't avail themselves of housing loans for the fear of incurring debts.
"In time, they will realize the waste of renting when they can afford owning their own houses."
When one decides to buy a house, she also said to consider the cost of amortization, that it won't hinder day to day living expenses including food, education of children, medicines, clothes, utility bills  and phone bills, fares or gasoline, among others.
"Most from this generation, we have observed, don't want to be deprived of a comfortable lifestyle so saving up for a house is not their priority.
They would rather spend money for shopping, leisure, recreation and travel," she added.
Felix added to consider the location of the house.
It may even cost more to travel from home to the school or to the workplace when the extra expense on fares could also be saved for down payment or reservation for a new house.
She also urged, "Buying your own house, when you are financially able, is wiser than renting.
Why pay for the rent of a house that will never be yours.
You wouldn't want to make any improvement on a rented house since it's not yours after all."
Saving up for a dream DECA home, Saving up for a dream DECA homeTHE growing low-cost housing backlog in the country, estimated at 3.6 million units as of 2011, has prompted 8990 Housing Development Corporation to double its efforts in building more homes for the Filipino masses.

It has been projected that the overhang will reach 6.2 million by 2030 for houses priced at P400,000 to P1.25 million each, corresponding to 8990's market.
Jesus Januario Atencio, president and CEO of 8990 Holdings Inc., said: "We try to see a DECA-nation wherein cost of products are able to supply housing services and housing units to many other parts of the Philippines that need this kind of decent and affordable housing.
Many of our working class Filipinos can now own their dream homes."
But Atty.
Vicente Sotto, 8990 general manager for credit collection, said that their most common problem is competing with other expenses in a budget of a homeowner.
Thus, their account officers help homeowners with their budget so they can cope with monthly amortization and other expenses.
For prospective homebuyers, however, 8990 has ongoing projects in Davao City-DECA Homes Resort Residences  in Barangay Tacunan, Tugbok District and DECA Homes Indangan  in Buhangin District.
Engr.
Juliet Domingo said a DHRR house-and-lot costs P995,000, while a DHI unit is pegged at P994,000.
These units may be availed through Pag-Ibig housing loan.
A young professional or a newly-married couple, with a salary or joint income of P30,000, may own their dream DECA home by cutting back on unnecessary expenses.

For a family, eating out is costly but some singles save more when they go to fastfood outlets or "karinderyas."
Consider your mobile spending, as prepaid loading may be a wiser option or settle for instant coffee mixes instead of getting your daily caffeine dose from your favorite coffee shops.

Cutting down on regular vacation expenses and/or shopping sprees may also help you save sufficient money for a house's monthly amortization.
Why not go for more affordable brands instead of signature ones?
These are but some ways to save for a dream DECA home.
Your little sacrifices now far outweigh the benefits of owning your own house.

Choosing a contractor, Choosing a contractorKarlo Paolo R.
Pates, CHOOSING the right contractor plays a vital role in the success of any property development project.
Architect Francisco C.
Santos Jr., FPIA, United Architects of the Philippines , said the contractors' good track record gives an advantage for them to earn the project.
"But before the choosing a contractor of the project, the owner/stakeholder will tap first a financial institution to assess how much budget is needed for the project then will hire a professional architect to design the project plan.
The architect will be getting services of several other professionals including a civil engineer, registered master plumber, electrical engineer among others to proceed to the planning stage before proceeding to the part of the selection of the contractor," Santos said.

Santos, the managing editor of Santos Architecture and Urban Planner, an architectural firm that also specializes in planning, design, urban planning, project designing and such, also bared the bidding of contractors conducted by a government agency and private firms are different.
 
Competitive or Public Bidding is a method of procurement that is open to any interested and qualified party.

The bidding documents must be prepared or issued by the procuring entity or the owner.

The Philippine Bidding Documents contains documents including Invitation to Apply for Eligibility and to Bid , Eligibility documents and data sheet, Instruction to Bidders , Bid Data Sheet , General Conditions of Contract , Special Conditions of Contract , Specifications, Drawings, Bill of Quantities and Form and Qualification Information.
"After namin mabigyan ng mga bidding documents ang mga prospect contractors ng aming project.
Nag-iinvestigate kami ng kanilang financial standing kung capable ba sila then track record nila based sa mga accomplished and ongoing projects nila to make sure they are credibile enough to be awarded with the project," Santos added.
Other agencies such as Bids and Awards Committee , Technical Working Group , consultants, BAC secretariat and end user unit will also participate in the preparation of the bidding documents on government projects while private firms do not need any of these.
A bid security document must also be submitted also by the bidder.
It guarantees the procuring entity that the awarded bidder will follow all the details laid down on the project plan.
If the bidder fails to submit the bid security, his or her bid will be rejected.
The bidder's bid security may be forfeited according to these matters: withdraws its bid beyond the deadline, the bidder does not accept corrections of arithmetical errors, the bidder being considered for award does not accept the award or does not sign the contract within the period prescribed in the bidding documents or the bidder being post-qualified is suspended for not providing the BAC required clarifications within the prescribed period.
Designs and spaces, Designs and spacesKriztja Marae G.
Labrador, LIVING spaces get smaller and prices get quite expensive with the rise of vertical and horizontal condominiums in Davao City.
It is interesting to note though that home or condo owners style their spaces for it to be functional.
Liza Jardinero, Interior Sales Designer for a furniture provider company, said that for such living spaces, there is a need to put in furniture that will not only save space but also maximize it.
She said they have innovated their space-saver furniture line that provides pull-out beds, cabinets shelves, study tables and kitchen.
Jardinero said this is fast becoming the trend in the metropolis where people want to get purpose in everything that they are putting into their living spaces.
"Simplicity ang modern wala kanang masyadong kailangang gawin, minimalist talaga siya.
Ang tinitingnan yung service na binibigay ng design," she said.
But for the country, she said this is still slowly entering the design market and is currently in the "acceptance" phase.
This space-saving design, according to her, needs some understanding before someone can fully grasp its concept.
She added that with this type of designing a living space, every part of it becomes useful from the floor to the ceiling.
For the materials and colors, Jardinero said their company is using particle boards with laminates that offer various colors and designs, particularly wood grain designs, for a much cheaper price.
She added that these materials are durable and workable, meaning it can be repaired or changed from time to time.
Staying abreast with real estate boom, Staying abreast with real estate boomArianne Caryl N.
Casas, DAVAO City continues to be one of the fastest growing cities in the country today.
Its real estate industry continues to flourish with its growing population and a bullish property market, attracting big players to expand projects in the city.
Davao City Investment Promotion Center  officer in charge Ivan C.
Cortez said real estate business is apparently doing well in the city with property development projects going on in almost every corner.
"Davao City continues to grow and is far from being saturated," he said.

"Simply because the market is here, businesses are growing and are finding a new niche here and abroad so there is an increase in the demand for more production, which will always entail the growth of businesses that will supply the new demand," he added.
In fact, new investments coming into Davao City in the first quarter of this year increased by 4.11 percent over the same period last year.
"Most of the big ticket investments in the last three years are poured still in property development.
More than 70 percent of new investments in terms of cost are in the real estate industry," Cortez said.
He said investments in real property are "evident in the physical development of the city that is characterized by sprawling movement both in the southern and northern parts of the city."
"The completion of the bypass roads will further hasten the sprawl.
Township projects and self-contained communities will continue to be the new direction in terms of property development," Cortez said.

The presence of big companies putting up shops in the city is a manifestation that Davao has really become an exciting city in terms of investments.
The rise of IT parks, The rise of IT parksAntonio L.
Colina IV, DAVAO City is no longer a blip on the investors' radar when it comes to investments coming from the IT-Business Process Outsourcing  industry.
Thus, infrastructures that can very well support the exodus of these locators are but necessary to keep the momentum going for the city being the No.
1 among Next Wave Cities in the Philippines.
The latest, Matina IT Park, a Philippine Economic Zone Authority -accredited development, is set to open for business within the year on McActhur Highway in Matina, Davao City.
The Matina IT Park, touted as the largest in Mindanao, is comprised of three buildings -- the first and third are four-storey high while second is three-storey high with a combined lease area of 19,790 square meters.
Each edifice has spaces available for lease not only to BPO companies but also to commercial companies.
Matina IT Park is already the third project of developer Plaza De Luisa Development, after the two edifices being occupied by Sutherland Global Services on Jacinto Extension and Quirino Avenue, Davao City.
The completion of Matina IT Park cranks up the number of spaces that can house the newcomers, joining Lanang Business Park, Felcris IT Park, Pink Walters IT Building, Ambiente Teleservices, and HAI Global Services, all of these are Peza-accredited.
The rise of IT parks is a boon not only to the real estate industry but also to the employment generation, which will eventually benefit the local economy in the process.
The BPO boom comes on the heels of the city's brighter prospects on the real estate industry, plus the availability of talent pool to support the companies' operations.
The real estate landscape of the city is fast-changing.
Soon, there will be towering buildings that will hold one's head up high; a proof that the the economic powerhouse that is Davao is now breaking away from what used to be a once quiet hamlet that nestles within the agricultural region.
Innovations, satisfaction with FourlinQ, Innovations, satisfaction with FourlinQFOURLINQ paves its way to the doors and windows of today's architectural highlights and functional design features in Filipino homes and structures.
FourlinQ, the leading fabricator in the local market, takes its pride in introducing new windows and doors material in the Philippines.

It ventured in supplying unplasticized polyvinyl chloride  windows and doors materials, thus making an indelible mark as the most durable alternative to wood and aluminum.
FourlinQ continues to lead the way toward innovation and customer's lifetime satisfaction.
Automated windows, corner doors with no middle post, security screens, slide and fold, and other special shapes requested by architects are among these innovations.
Marked as the company's edge and advantages from other companies, FourlinQ covers a vast market and provides customers the best options that suit their budget.
FourlinQ products are known for their structural tenacity to resist the harshest weather conditions and fight discoloration and warp because of their ultra-violet, heat-stabilizers and titanium dioxide blend.
Apart from their elegant fixture, attractive appearance and revolutionary designs, FourlinQ windows and doors guarantee cost-efficiency, thermal efficiency, corrosion resistance, fire retardation, invulnerability to insects and termites and non-deterioration within 10 years.
FourlinQ also provides excellent sound insulation caused by its multiple-chamber-designed profiles with internal web that significantly traps the noise of bustling city.
Moreover, FourlinQ Doors & Windows characterizes unique multi-locking mechanisms, air and water impenetrability, long-lasting performance and above all environment-friendly.
Equipped with advanced technology, which further guarantees long-lasting beauty, energy savings and structural strength, the company partners with foreign companies like Veka Inc., Roto Frank AG, Skyframe and Hornschuch.
FourlinQ has expanded to other business products in partnership with Oppein Kitchen and Wardrobe andJohann-Jack Designs for Window Coverings and Interior Products.
Oppein has grown to become one of the largest cabinetry manufacturers in the Asia.
It offers a wide variety of items, from kitchen cabinet and countertops, wardrobe, bathroom cabinet, interior door, kitchen electrical appliance and accessory, home furniture and other building materials.
As the leading fabricator of custom-made window fashions/coverings/treatments, Johann-Jack Designs offers Roller blinds, wood blinds, combi blinds, shangri-la blinds, double glazed Venetian blinds, duo shades, sleepshades and jackylyn drapery.

FourlinQ, with its competent partners, also keeps abreast of the latest trends and designs, new to the Philippine market.
Fourlinq Windows and Doors has a showroom at 2/F unit 213-214 Nova Tierra Square Barrio Pampanga Lanang, Davao City.

Boosting harvest, Boosting harvestKarlo Paolo R.
Pates, THE Department of Agriculture  in Davao Region has implemented some innovations on their farming procedures to further boost the quality and quantity of crops being produced in the region.
Regional Agriculture and Fisheries Information Section  chief Noel Provido, in an interview with Sun.Star Davao at his office on Monday afternoon, said they are proposing the agricultural mechanization, which in turn could help the production yield of the crops and provide bigger incomes for the farmers.
"The post-harvest facilities are also needed by the farmers.
An example of it is the mechanical dryer, through this one, farmers can still dry crops even if it's raining," he said.
During dry season, the mechanical dryer hastens drying period from two to three days to just one day.
Aside from the farm facilities, DA is also improving irrigation systems.
"Irrigation is really important particularly in the rice production, so we really need to upgrade our irrigations especially on a dry season like El Ni\xf1o," Provido said.

With the mild El Nino seen to affect the country's harvest, he said, "One of our programs include rice stocking, providing assistance to the farmers by delivering variety of seedlings and at the same time we are also monitoring the areas for possibility of conducting cloud seeding in some affected areas."
New varieties of next generation rice  are also being developed by DA that could withstand flood and drought.
 
"We are still looking on its characteristics.
When it comes to rice production, regardless if it is tolerant to flood like San Marino-1 or tolerant to drought, what we are looking into is their potential to produce and yield because we want to address food security, that's our main concern," he said.
The next generation rice has been undergoing trials and consultations with the farmers in different communities with regards to its variety and saleability.
"We are conducting researches or National Commodity Testing  for the for rice but this we are involving the farmers.
They  can immediately identify what variety should they prefer," he said.
With the engagement of the farmers during the trials conducted by DA, they now have the say whether they prefer the said variety of the new generation of rice.
Testing areas in the Davao Region for the new generation rice varieties are located at Hagonoy, Davao del Sur and Carmen, Davao del Norte.
Plastic films
In 2014, Macondray Plastics Products Inc.
introduced the use of plastic film in their plantations to further increase the crops quantity and its product quality.
The use of the said plastic films will help the farmers battle different adversities, including climate change, pests and diseases.
Through the newly-introduced plastic films, the company minimized its use of chemicals on their crops since it's already protected.
Macplas, on the other hand, has formed a Macplas Academy, composed of a team from the company that will educate the farmers on how to make use of the said product.
Plastic film products, according to Macplas, can also be used for organic farming, urban farming and aquaculture.
For crops and plants, they have used mulch film, solar dryer film, silage bags, fruit sun shield, grain bags, and grow bag while for the aquaculture industry, they have a salt bed liner, fry bag, and pond liner.
Adapting to change, Adapting to changeRuji Peter S.
Abat, AS FARMERS are reeling from the scorching heat brought by the mild El Ni\xf1o, there is a need for them to adapt more sustainable farming methods to increase their chances of producing more crops as soon as the next drought season comes.
Department of Agriculture -Davao El Ni\xf1o focal person Herna Palma said that since their agency has donated over millions worth of assistance for farmers, it is best that they learn various farming methods that could mitigate the effects of extreme heat so they could have a sustainable farm.
"Farmers should also treat El Ni\xf1o just like any catastrophic disaster since it could cost them their livelihood.
That is why they have to incorporate disaster prevention and mitigation methods in their farming," she said.
Palma said one of the effective sustainable farming methods that farmers could adapt is the conservation agriculture, saying its effects are a good start for disaster prevention and mitigation.
"The goals and benefits of Conservation Agriculture is to sequester amounts of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, increase the efficiency of water and fertilizer use, improve soil quality and increase the farm's capacity to withstand extreme events," Palma said.
The effects of El Ni\xf1o are amplified when there is an increase in carbon dioxide emission.
This has then been a challenge to farmers since from the get go, they are already causing too much carbon dioxide emission when they till the land.
But conservation agriculture suggests that farmers should reduce or avoid tilling their land to decrease carbon dioxide.
To increase the soil quality of lands, Palma also suggests that farmers should utilize mulching more.
She described mulching as a method wherein different materials are spread across the surface of the soil.
Palma said mulching can increase the soil's fertility, maintain moisture and prevent growth of weeds.
Types of mulches include bark or wood shavings locally known as bagaso, compost, grass clippings, shredded leaves, straw and salt hay, grass clippings and animal manure.
The most highly-recommended mulch is the straw and salt hay mulch since it wards off soil-born diseases while it is also a low maintenance mulch for farmers since it does not decompose fast.
But Palma discouraged the overuse of animal manure compost since it contains methane, a greenhouse gas that could contribute to the rise of temperature in the environment.
Other than mulching, Palma also said farmers could instead use direct seeding rather than transplanting.
This is because through direct seeding, there can be less soil disturbance and this would mean less carbon dioxide emissions.
Another farming method in the conservation agriculture is the use of cover crops.
Just like mulching, cover crops can correct the nitrogen levels of the soil, prevent weeds from sprouting and maintaining moisture but its added benefits include the absorption of more carbon dioxide in the air and it acts as a natural pest repellant.
Among the most commonly-used cover crops are rye, buckwheat and oats.
DA also recommends the cultivation of drought-resistant crops to prevent losses among farmers.
For rice growers, Palma said the DA recently approved the drought resistant Green Super Rice  line.
Under the GSR line are GSR-5, GSR-8 and GSR-12 but Palma said that these crops are still at the pilot phase.
 But it is expected that these lines will start to produce yields by next year.
She also said they have a wide variety of drought-resistant crops including corn, banana and other major crops grown in the region.
Palma also reminded farmers to avoid excessive use of fertilizer as it could harm not only the crops but the soil composition in general, saying, "Most fertilizers have high nitrate content and too much nitrate on the soil could make it infertile."
But it is not only farmers that should be educated as Palma said communities situated near farmlands should also be informed of these methods so they could also help farmers in fully implementing conservation agriculture.
"Whether there is an El Ni\xf1o or not, farmers should be aware of what they should do to prevent damages to their crops.
After the El Ni\xf1o there is La Ni\xf1a that is why farmers should be prepared in any weather condition," Palma added.
El Ni\xf1o still threatens Davao, El Ni\xf1o still threatens DavaoReuel John F.
Lumawag, DESPITE the recent rains in the evening, the effects of the El Nino phenomenon can still be felt in Davao Region.

The dry spell poses a threat to the region's agricultural industry, which is also its main economic driver.

The aquaculture industry, especially those that are inland, are also in danger for fears of the ponds drying up.
However, Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources  in Davao Region Dr.
Fatma Idris said despite the hot weather, the aquaculture sector in the region remains safe.

She said the region has a Type 4 Climatic Condition, wherein the region experiences rainfall that is more or less evenly distributed throughout the year.
Idris said the region's climate has somehow helped cushion the impact of El Nino on the inland aquaculturists.
"Sa ngayon sa Davao Region, wala pa kaming narereceive na complaints or damages sa fisheries sector (For now in Davao Region, we did not receive any complaints or damages in the fisheries sector," she said.
But Idris said BFAR in Davao City noted lower water levels in catfish  ponds but this is not alarming to them considering that hito is able to survive in ponds with low water levels.
To ensure that temperature levels at the fish ponds are at acceptable temperature for the fishes, Idris said inland fishermen utilize paddle wheels to maintain a cool temperature in the ponds.
She said the agency will provide fingerlings to the inland fishermen in case the situation worsens.
They will only release these fingerlings if the El Nino has subsided.
Idris said they will prioritize the poorest of the poor among the fishermen when dispersing the fingerlings.
For now, she said they are more worried of the La Nina Phenomenon for the inland fisherman than the El Nino because increase rainfall will desalinate the ponds which are intended for salt water fishes.

Meanwhile, Idris said the increase in the temperature is also beneficial for those fishermen or aquaculturists who get their livelihood from the sea.
"We can say the higher temperature has a positive effect to the fishing grounds because the fish in the cooler areas will move to the warmer areas.
But this is only true for the temperature we are having now but if the heat goes to an extreme level then it is not favorable for the fishes," Idris said, adding that the heat temperature now in the region is at acceptable levels for the fishes in the sea.
She said if the weather is too hot, fishes will move to the deeper parts of the sea.
Idris also said the fact that most of the fish farms are in the sea has cushioned the effect of El Nino to the fisheries and aquaculture industries.
"The farmers are the ones who are really affected by the phenomenon because they are dependent on the water for their crops but for the fisheries sector, we already have water and many of those in the industry have their fish cages at the sea," she said.
Despite the little impact of El Nino to the fisheries sector, Idris said the hot weather and the sudden rainfall in the recent weeks caused extreme changes in the temperature at sea, triggering a Red Tide at Balite Bay in Mati City, Davao Oriental.
"Based on the results of red tide monitoring by BFAR and the local government units, shellfish sample collected from Balite Bay in Mati, Davao Oriental is positive for red tide toxins," the agency said in its Shellfish Bulletin last April 24.
She said the agency will conduct a weekly monitoring in the area to determine the level of toxicity of the shellfish in the area.
The agency said all types of shellfish and alamang gathered from Balite Bay are hot save for consumption.

But fish, squids, shrimps, and crabs are safe for consumption provided that these are fresh, washed thoroughly, and internal organs are removed before cooking.
With the ongoing El Nino, the fisheries sector is still in good shape but if things go bad, the agency has already placed its assistance for the farmers.
Mitigating effects of climate change, Mitigating effects of climate changeAntonio L.
Colina IV, AS CLIMATE change threatens the agriculture sector, the government sees the need to bring back the country's forest cover by creating a carbon sink to mitigate its effects.
But advocacy group Philippine Palm Oil Development Council Inc.
 said that reforestation efforts are best done when stakeholders learn to introduce the planting of oil palm either in farms as an intercrop or in the denuded forests.
The think-tank even highly recommended this in the priority reforestation program of the government dubbed "National Greening Program" .
The ultimate goal of NGP is more focused on achieving food security, poverty reduction, climate change adaptation and mitigation.
The total target under NGP is 1.5 billion trees in 1.5 million hectares for a period of six years from 2011 to 2016.
Dr.
Pablito Pamplona, board of director and secretary of PPDCI, said these crops sequester the carbon and thus prevent the concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere in the process.
The CO2 is one of the greenhouse gasses that worsen global warming by trapping in too much heat coming from the sun.
"Oil palm is found to be a better carbon sink than natural forest because it captures higher carbon/unit area," he said.
A study quoted by Pamplona found that a hectare of three-year-old oil palm trees can sequester 5.8 tons and can go as much as 45.2 tons when these trees are 24 years old as compared to the grassland, which can offset carbon at one ton per hectare.
Also, the planting techniques are just simple, as these crops do not need as much requirements as what other crops do.
First, there's no need to cut the grasses and brushes, much less burning that will only scratch the ground for more environmental risks such as erosion and further damage on the soil.
"Just allow the cut grasses and trees to rot as organic fertilizer for the oil palm trees," he added.
In the reforestation program, the think-tank recommended this crop as it has higher survival rate of 95 percent under harsh grassland environment as compared to other crops.
He was dismayed over the use of commercial crops like cacao and coffee in the NGP, which will later on die, cut, and turn into charcoal by farmers for livelihood to sustain their families.
These two crops, he explained, can survive the grassland's harsh environment when intercropped with oil palm, which prevents soil erosion for its vast root system.
"Oil palm has massive root systems that reduce soil erosion in the sloping uplands," he said.
"A new technique of crop-livestock integration, when applied, shall promote crop diversity and added income in the upland."
In neighboring Asean countries like Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand and Vietnam, restoring the forests has been successful as they succeeded in reforesting their degraded grasslands using common strategy use of oil palm trees and rubber.
Pamplona also discussed the economic gains of the oil palm industry to the farmers, saying the Asean neighbors are successful in bringing down poverty levels.
"Promoting inclusive growth occurs when the poor, upland dwellers, get equal benefits from the economic growth of the country," he said.
The country has been lagging behind its Asean neighbors when it comes to cranking up the number of oil palms planted.
In 2013, Indonesia expanded to 10.5 million hectares of oil palms, followed by Malaysia  while Philippines was the lowest with 72,000 hectares.
According to PPDCI, the income that can be generated with oil palm is relatively higher than other crops; easy to plant and maintain; early maturing and long years of harvest; and provides employment opportunities.
Oil palm is also able to produce more even with smaller areas as compared to coconuts.
Say, to produce 1,000 tons of vegetable oil, this crop only takes 234 hectares while coconut takes 1,190 hectares.
For his part, Davao City Investment Promotions Center  officer-in-charge Ivan Cortez said investors who are willing to invest on oil palm are very much welcome in the city.
In fact, there is one investor, who is a major player in Malaysia's oil palm industry, who came to visit to discuss the matter with the National Commission on Indigenous Peoples .
The firm is looking at 1,000-hectare property in Marilog District.
If pushed through, members of the Ovu-Manuvo tribe will benefit from this venture as they will be tapped in the planting of the seedlings.
The official also said that this partnership will empower economically small farmers, especially the ones who own five hectares of land.
Environmental group Panalipdan Southern Mindanao urged the City Government to study before accepting investments on oil palm expansion in Marilog.
The environmental impact must also be considered before the economic gains.
"Paquibato is supposedly one of the important water resource base areas of the city while palm oil is not grown organically but dependent on chemical inputs which might pollute the local water resources in the uplands and affect the water supplies in the lowlands, a concern that we both shared," it said.
But Pamplona added that among other crops that produce oil, oil palm takes lesser use of fertilizers.
City Councilor Danilo Dayanghirang cited the need to develop the city's upland areas for agriculture as the urbanization of the center is simply not enough to sustain economic growth.
He suggested planting of high-value crops such as coffee, cacao, corn, and rubber as crops that will fit well in the highland communities like in Marilog and Paquibato.
Life with a purpose, Life with a purposeKriztja Marae G.
Labrador, SOMETIMES, pushing yourself to your limits may lead you to discovering a whole new side of yourself that you never knew existed.

This was proven true by Louise Suamen, who found her purpose when she decided to go out of her 201ccomfort zone201d in her hometown in Siquijor, Negros Oriental and moved to Davao City to pursue her passion.
Louise is currently working as a psychosocial worker for Tambayan Children2019s Rights Center, a non-government organization working with less privileged and discriminated adolescent girls in the street aging 9 to 17 years old.
A Bachelor of Science in Psychology graduate of Silliman University where she had maintained an academic scholarship and graduated cum laude in 2010, Louise shared that unlike her batchmates, she did not know what to do after college.
201cHalos akong mga classmates nag HR  pero dili gyud nako na feel ,201d she said.
Louise then decided to live with her sister in Manila and worked in tutorial centers but this also did not work for her until she was invited to join an organization named Jesuit Volunteers Philippines, a volunteer organization based in Ateneo de Manila University.
201cI really liked the premise of the organization wherein for one year, they will place you in an area in need,201d she said in vernacular.
This then led her to Tambayan in Davao City wherein she was assigned for one year but then decided to stay as a regular worker back in 2011.
201cI really liked the work here; one thing that really stopped me from leaving is the experience itself, the children,201d she said.
Louise recalls that during her first few weeks working for the organization, she felt intimidated with the children and scared with their occasional visits in the residents of these children that they are monitoring which are mostly located in the known as crime prone areas in the city.
201cBefore, when I look at myself I am really afraid, I do not like tough jobs, I am always in my comfort zone, I do not take risks in life until after college when I saw that landing in a corporate job had no meaning for me,201d she said.
201cThat is when I remembered that I asked God to give me a job wherein I can be an instrument of His goodness and there I found Tambayan,201d Louise added.
Working for the organization for almost four years now, Louise finds pleasure and joy in helping and empowering children with their rights.

201cThe moment I went out of my comfort zone, I found meaning and I realized that if you are not comfortable you can do things that you think are impossible.
Your abilities will be enhanced and your perspective will widen, the way you look at yourself will change,201d she said.
Louise said that even in the future, she will still be pursuing on doing humanitarian work wherein she can really see the direct help given to those in need.
She added that she is also planning to teach and share her experiences to others soon.

Born on November 26, 1989, Louise is the youngest among five siblings.
She finished grades 1 to 4 of her elementary education in Siquijor Central Elementary School and grades 5 to 6 in Siquijor Central Elementary School back in 2002 and high school education at Siquijor Provincial Science High School in 2006.
Foodrunning is sharing, Foodrunning is sharingStella A.
Estremera, AN IDEA has taken shape and has started to grow in Davao City 2013 alleviating hunger by sharing.
A concept observed in the US and Canada by Davao City Councilor Leonardo R.
Avila III last year during his vacation there, there is now a group known as Davao Foodrunners, which has already been registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission and just awaiting the release of its signed documents.
201cCan you imagine the bulk of food wasted from all these restaurants in the city? All these are thrown because restaurants will not risk poisoning anyone with spoiled food,201d Avila said in discussing the concept upon his return from his vacation late last year.
The problem, however, is that restaurants will not donate these excess food because of the risk of these getting spoiled in handling since these were already supposed to have been served earlier.
This is where Foodrunners comes in, Avila said.
As a registered organization, Foodrunners take the responsibility over the food they distribute to charity institutions and poor communities all over the city.
Members at present are the councilor and his wife Lorie Trinidad-Avila, Boy and Beth Jolampong, Tony Manahan, Melma Abasolo, Agnes Dacono, Monica Ayala, Vic and Ethel Canizares, Jesse Abrigo, Jon Morales, Alex Britanico, and Dinah Tolentino-Fuentes.
Since they started just this year, restaurants in the city are now responding positively.
201cThere are even restaurants here who allot a day to prepare food specifically for the Foodrunners,201d Avila said last Thursday during his birthday celebration with Badjao families in Matina Aplaya.
Aside from taking full responsibility for any untoward incident regarding the food they distribute and distributing these at the quickest time possible, Foodrunners members have also committed to celebrate their birthdays by sharing.
Thus, Avila celebrated his birthday with an early dinner with the Badjao residents of Kanaan at sitio Seaside 2 in Matina Aplaya.
The simple dinner of rice, pansit, grilled pirit, and kinilaw na tamban was shared by the almost 500 residents of Kanaan.
Indeed, a new movement of sharing has been jumpstarted in Davao.
Butch Aggasid: Tattoo artist on-the-rise, Butch Aggasid: Tattoo artist on-the-rise
Aggasid doing his craft 
INTERNATIONAL tattoo artist Albert John Aggasid is one of the most accomplished and talented tattoo artists in the Phillipines.
 He has been invited to conventions in Europe, the United States and Asia, after a long and storied career of winning both national competitions in the Philipines and international competitions.
His career as a tattoo artist grew from a hobby into an internationally-desired artist as clients from different parts of the worlds fly to the philippines to get a tattoo from him.
Inspired by an acquaintance who had fascinating tattoos all over his body,  he started his career in Cebu using an improvised tattoo machine on willing- often drunk, by-standers who became his first clients.
Mr.
Agassid went beyond commercial fame and taught his skills to other aspiring artists as an Art teacher every summmer.
His works grew from tattooing local and international celebrities with unique styles on portraits, realism, 3D and Tribal tattoo designs.
 He resided in Malaybalay City and introduced the art of tattoos there by Bloody Works, a renknown tattoo business which gained more admirers of his works, tattooing notable people like the families of politicians as well as other businessmen there.
 While doing so, he also established himself at the top of his field by winning several tattoo competitions.
These included the nationally known Kadayawan Festival in Davao city, and "Tatak" held in Cagayan de Oro City.
In 2012, he reigned at the highly regarded 201cPinatikan: Araw ng Davao Tattoo Competition"  where his portrait of Mayor Duterte won him as a Champion.
In 2013, he won as champion with his ethnic design during Bukidnon's first ever tattoo competition under the Black and Gray category and was tagged as the "Black & Gray Tattoo Master".
Perhaps the most well known trophy is the international competition 'Dutdutan2019, which is internationally known as the biggest tattoo convention in Asia, held in Manila where he topped among the hundreds of artists under the "Tattoo of the Day" Category.
With all these awards, he was moved to open 'Ink Digger Tattoo Studio' in Cagayan de Oro City.
Mr.
Agassid is known especially for his portrait and Tribal designs nationwide as well as in the USA and Asia.
But even with his success, he still makes it a point to deliver quality service and responsible teaching.
"Not just to give a nice tatto or to simply satisfy a client.
I want to make sure I could offer them quality work that is worth the pay", he told Sun.Star Cagayan de Oro in aninterview.
Ink Digger offers 3D, Portraits, Realism, Tribal, Watercolor tattoos, Tattoo repair and Cover-ups.
His works can be viewed on the shop's official website .

Hyundai is first to offer Android Auto system , Hyundai is first to offer Android Auto system DETROIT 2014 Hyundai is the first carmaker to offer Google's Android Auto system.
Starting Tuesday, Android smartphone users with a 2015 Sonata can ask dealers to download the system for free.
Drivers must have a Sonata with navigation, which is part of an optional technology package.
Android Auto will soon be available on other Hyundai models.
Android Auto connects to drivers' smartphones and lets them access certain apps, like Google Maps or Spotify, by voice, steering wheel controls or touchscreen graphics on the dashboard.
It locks their phones while in use to help keep drivers' eyes on the road.
Google says Android Auto is expected to be offered on 28 different brands by the 2016 model year.
Hyundai says it expects to offer Apple's version of the system, CarPlay, sometime soon.

J.
Co Donuts opens first store in Negros , J.
Co Donuts opens first store in Negros 
Photo taken from J.CO Donuts & Coffee, Philippines Facebook page.

Erwin P.
Nicavera, J.
CO Donuts & Coffee will open on Wednesday, May 27, its first store in Negros Occidental at The District Northpoint Ayala Mall in Talisay City.
This is its fifth branch in the Visayas and its 37th around the country.
J.
Co marketing manager Alvene Ngo said they will serve sweet treats and free half-dozen donuts for the first 50 costumers when they open doors at 10 a.m.
201cJ.
Co is a lifestyle caf\xe9 which offers Filipinos a unique and comforting taste of coffee and delectable flavors of donuts with prices that are competitive in the existing market,201d Ngo said.
The store offers at least 30 variants of donuts and five of sandwiches, which can be paired with several flavors of handcrafted coffee beverages, hot or iced.
J.
Co originated in Indonesia, with its first branch established in 2005.
Now it has more than 200 branches around the world.
Ingredients are imported from Indonesia, Ngo said, adding that 201cwe are following the international standard of J.
Co so there is a uniform taste of our product wherever you are.201d
Since Negrenses are known to have sweet tooth, Contemporain Foods Inc., a Manila-based franchise owner of all J.
Co branches in the Philippines, brought the donuts store here, after it just opened in Davao two weeks ago.
Ngo said they have great confidence on the big and growing business potential of Negros Occidental especially for long-term investments.
She said that their product is easily adaptable to the Filipino palate, especially the Negrense taste.
J.
Co has already two branches in Cebu and two more in Iloilo.
After opening in The District in Talisay, Ngo said they are planning to open in malls in Bacolod City.
PWD finds hope in life after Tesda, PWD finds hope in life after Tesda
Eduardo Ligalig 
A PAINTER, a musician, and a father of two, that's how he described himself at least 25 years ago.

Eduardo Ligalig was a happily married man who painted movie billboards for theaters in Antipolo, Rizal and sings in a band to support his family until 1990 when he met an accident that caused his disability.

He was disoriented for several months, and his leg was broken when a speeding tricycle hit him while he was crossing a street in Manila.
While he was still trying to recover from a head injury and broken leg, he lost his job.
He also finds it hard to go with his bandmates in gigs with his disability.
Without a job and a family to feed, he was broke.

Ligalig thought seeing his two children and wife eat rice mixed with hot water and sugar was the hardest part of being the family's breadwinner but it was only the beginning of the many challenges.

He said he tried selling garlic in the market but he could no longer keep up with his family's needs.
His eldest son was still four years old at the time and the youngest was still an infant.
There are times they had to settle for a bowl of congee, mixed with malunggay, sugar and a little bit of milk for the kids' nutrition.
It was not long after the accident that his wife decided to leave him and bring their children to Davao City to seek help from his in-laws.
 It was in 1998 when he last saw his two children.
"Nakadecide ang asawa ko na iwan ako at dalhin niya ang mga anak ko sa Davao.
Ang hirap pero wala akong magawa ," Ligalig said.

Since then, he has been living alone.
His father died when he was 10 and his mother is already old and could not help him with his finances.

Ligalig's friends would bring him to different provinces and play billiard tournaments or play guitar or other musical instruments just so he could support himself and send money to his children in Davao.

But times became so hard that he hardly could not afford his own personal bills, much more send financial support to his children.

In 2000, he decided to go home to his hometown in Bohol.
Someone gave him a piece of violin and used it to serenade guests in different resorts in Bohol.

"Minsan binigyan ako ng P50 or P70 pero kadalasan wala.
Hindi din naman ako araw-araw nakakapag-tugtog kasi walang tao.
," he said.

He likened his lifestyle to a beggar -- a man with a cane on one hand and a musical instrument on the other.
 He lived in Anda town, in an old house of his grandmother that was damaged by the 7.2 magnitude earthquake.
Several typhoons have past and blew the roof piece by piece.

"Kagabi umuulan dito, hindi ako nakatulog kasi naghahanap pa ako ng lugar sa bahay kung saan hindi ako nababasa ," Ligalig said.
A resort owner where he was playing violin, inspired him to enroll for a scholarship in the Technical Education and Skills Development Authority  and chose bartending in Florance technical school.
"Mahilig kasi ako sa wine.
May mga barkada ako at mahilig ako mag timpla ," he said.
He could not believe that after all those years of public ridicule, he can now proudly tell everyone he finished bartending course in Tesda.
He was absorbed as a bartender in the resort where he used to have his on-the-job training.

After graduation, he already found hope that his life would change for a better and soon realize the dream of reuniting with his children and wife whom he haven't seen since they left.

Without a cellphone or any communication gadgets, his boss and workmates helped him find his children on Facebook and for the first time in many years, he was able to talk to them.

"Priority na gyud nako ako mga bata karun nga naa na koy trabaho.
Sa kadugay na, wala gyud ko nakasuporta nila.
Gusto ko na makahatag gihapon ko bisan ginagmay ," Ligalig said.

Just this month, Ligalig's story to success won as the Best Story  in the Tesda Video Making Contest Year 2.

The winners were chosen from over a hundred of entries and were recognized at the Philippine International Convention Center in Pasay City.
Ligalig received a cash prize of P15,000.
He then used it to pay most of his personal loans and send money to his children.
"Malaki talaga ang pasasalamat ko sa aking school, sa Tesda, kay Sec.
Joel Villanueva, sa aming boss na talagang na bigay sa akin ng oportunidad na maka enrol sa Tesda," he said.
After all the expenses from the trip to Pasay, he was still able to send money for his children.
"Ang akong kalipay ang akong mga anak.
Masaya ako at hindi talaga sila napababayaan ng asawa ko kahit wala akong naibigay sa kanila.
Honor silang dalawa.
Ang panganay ko gusto na nag Criminology ay gusto talaga na mag SAF.
Ang youngest ko na babae gusto niyang mag teacher.
Nalipay ko na maghandom nila.
Nakapadala na ako para makatulong sa mga gastusin, pambili ng sapatos, at uniform.
Sa susunod, pag ipunan ko na talaga ang pamasahe para makita ko na sila.
May trabaho na ako," he said with full conviction.
.
My youngest, my daughter wants to be a teacher.
I am happy just by thinking of them.
I have already sent a little amount of money to help in the finances, to buy shoes and uniform.
Next time, I will really save up for fare to Davao and see them all.
I already have a job.)
Despite the distance and shortcomings as a husband and head of the family, he said his wife has not remarried nor found someone else to replace him.
He gushed as he said when asked about his wife: "Sabi kasi niya ako lang daw talaga ang mahal niya ."
His story can be seen on the YouTube video below, as well as on Tesda VII's Facebook page:


Get Cebu news for free on Internet.org by Facebook, Get Cebu news for free on Internet.org by Facebook
Sun.Star on Internet.org
For Talk 2018N Text, Smart and Sun subscribers, visit Sun.Star website on your phone without data charges
, NEWS in the dominant language in the Visayas and Mindanao is now available on free mobile data access through Talk 2018N Text  in partnership with the Facebook-led initiative, Internet.org.
Sun.Star, the only network of community newspapers in the Philippines, is the first Internet.org partner-news organization outside of Metro Manila.
Sun.Star provides news and information in English and Bisaya, the most used language in the central and southern part of the country.
Those who wish to get their Sun.Star news and information may do so from their mobile phones or tablets, even without connectivity, when they go through Internet.org through Talk 2018N Text, the value brand of Smart Communications Inc.
The service is also available to subscribers of Smart and Sun.
The Internet.org mobile app, launched last March in the Philippines, is a groundbreaking app that provides Filipinos with free access to an initial list of 24 informative and useful websites 2013 including Facebook and Messenger 2013 so that more are able to benefit from the wealth of information available through mobile Internet.
 Sun.Star is the newest addition to the roster of Internet.org sites available in the Philippines through TNT.


Nini Cabaero, Sun.Star Network Exchange  editor-in-chief, said, 201cWe2019re excited to be part of Internet.org because we share the same dream of making information available to more Filipinos.201d Sunnex runs www.sunstar.com.ph and is the new media department of Sun.Star Publishing Inc.
201cWhile broadsheets are based in Manila, we are located in the many communities of the Philippine archipelago.
Our website carries news and information from 12 major cities.
Our inclusion into Internet.org would make our content available to more people outside of the national capital,201d Cabaero added.
Michelle So, SuperBalita Cebu editor-in-chief, said, 201cWe provide our readers with the choice of language they like their news delivered 2013 English or Cebuano 2013 which other news websites cannot provide.
SuperBalita content leans toward stories about crime, sex and violence, showbiz and entertainment, neighborhood goings-on and local governance, all easy reading stuff.201d
Internet.org encourages content in the local language to connect the two thirds of the world without Internet access.
201cWe're very happy that Sun.Star's mobile website will be included in the roster of Internet.org content partners.
We believe that to reach out to new Internet users, web content is best appreciated when it's local, relevant and in the local language.
Sun.Star2019s balanced mix of English and Bisaya news content fills the need for relevant content for the VisMin region, and will hopefully encourage more new users to log in and use information sources on the Internet,201d said Jim Ayson, senior manager for Internet and media partnerships, Smart.
Isolde Amante, Sun.Star Cebu editor-in-chief, said, 201cCebu is a dynamic, creative community that faces the challenges that come with rapid growth.
It's a privilege to bring its stories to a larger community of readers, wherever they may be in the world.201d
Internet.org is the brainchild of Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook founder, who posted this message during the Philippine launch, 201cWe2019re one step closer to connecting the world as we launched Internet.org in the Philippines.
Now everyone in the country can have free access to Internet services for health, education, jobs and communication on the Smart network.201d
To access the Sun.Star website at www.sunstar.com.ph, a TNT, Smart or Sun subscriber will just have to download the Android app of Internet.org.
Once downloaded to the phone, the user opens the app and is brought to the list of free sites.
Non-Android users may access the site by typing www.internet.org.
 Once on the app or website, just click on Sun.Star and you will find relevant news and information about your community and the country.
For step-by-step instructions and other information, just text INTERNET to 9999 or visit talkntext.com.ph/internetorg.
Mobile data must be turned on to access Internet.org mobile app and site for free.

Great @ 15, Great @ 15
Screen shot of Sun.Star website
Mildred V.
Galarpe, GOOD journalism is Sun.Star's core value since it started more than 30 years ago.
In 2000, Sun.Star saw technology as a driving force in the future of news.
Jesus B.
Garcia Jr., Sun.Star chairman of the board, said they were scanning the news environment 15 years ago and saw that digital technology is going to change the media landscape.
"The idea of the website was to prepare the foundations of Sun.Star to be able to meet the needs and demands of the digital age.
That was the basic concept," Garcia said.
Today, the challenge for Sun.Star, Garcia said, is to provide the services of a gatekeeper to sift through the plethora of information that needs validation and verification.
Sun.Star president Julius G.
Neri Jr.
said technology has changed the role of newspapers.
Sun.Star has to adapt and innovate.

"Sun.Star is no longer just a newspaper, but an information provider to give readers the information they want, when they want it, and in whatever platform they choose," Neri said.
He said all the readers have so many choices available to them.
"They have various print publications; they have broadcast media, radio, Internet.
In the Internet alone, there are so many other subcategories.
We have apps, websites, e-papers and so forth.
So right now, the readers are spoiled for choice."
"It is our responsibility to be where our readers are, to remain relevant to them, to give them what they want to know about, what they want to read, when they want it, and in the way that they want it," he added.
The Sun.Star website, at www.sunstar.com.ph, grew with the audience and technology innovations in the last 15 years.
It is among the top performers in the online news industry and is the pioneer in online community journalism in the country, covering 12 major cities.

Now, on the website's 15th year, we celebrate 15 great things of Sun.Star online, mobile and social.
1.
Visually sexy - Taking cue from modern website design trends, Sun.Star adopted a new website design that features more photos and videos.
It runs dynamic galleries and media slideshows on any screen size.
The full screen slideshow is stunning and each slide represents a story.

Other media elements like sound bytes and video clips are also available, providing more life to a story.
These visual enhancements give Sun.Star readers a better reading experience, making www.sunstar.com.ph visually sexy.
2.
Certified mobile friendly - As more people browse websites using different mobile devices, Sun.Star saw the need to optimize and make its site responsive.
The new website is optimized for mobile, as well as for desktop.
It allows easy navigation, with no unnecessary finger movement needed to read the news.
Sun.Star is a Google-certified mobile friendly website.
3.
Thumb-friendly - For users on-the-move, Sun.Star is the way to go.
Multi-tasking is the word of the day and the thumb is the finger to play.
Getting the top headlines and breaking news can be done by thumb action.
Sun.Star's website has been optimized to make sure everything is big enough for easy navigation; spaces between elements are right for thumb clicking.
Sun.Star news is just a thumb away.



4.
Social all the time - Everybody is on Facebook, Twitter, Instagram and other social networking sites.
Sharing, commenting and recommending are social activities that connect friends, relatives and even enemies anytime, anywhere.
Sun.Star, with its improved website, allows sharing, commenting and recommending stories to social networking site easy and fast.
It provides a facility to comment and discuss hot issues of the day.
It also gives access to readers to connect to their favorite reporters and opinion writers for feedback or a news tip.
5.
Genuinely hyper-local - Sun.Star is the only network of community newspapers in the country.
It provides news from 12 major cities.
Its hyper-local content connects Filipinos here and abroad, making Sun.Star a home to many.
6.
Drone reporting - Sun.Star adopted another way of reporting news using drones or unmanned aerial vehicles to provide readers a wider view of an event.
The aircraft Sun.Star is using is remotely controlled.
Drone reporting shows readers the extent of fire damage, destruction by an earthquake or a typhoon, for example.
It provides vivid images of a sports event like Ironman, the Sinulog street dancing, road protests and a traffic mess.


7.
Live streaming - Sun.Star started live streaming in 2009.
It was something new for a newspaper company to try broadcasting, albeit over the Internet.
A basic camcorder, a free live streaming software and a free broadcasting service allowed Sun.Star to send live images of the Sinulog to the world, for the first time.
Filipinos abroad who saw the festival after years of being away got emotional and sent a deluge of thank-you messages.
Six years after the first live streaming, Sun.Star was able to stream live major festivals in the country like the Kadayawan in Davao, Panagbenga in Baguio, and Masskara in Bacolod, as well as international sports events like Ironman and Ronda Pilipinas.
Sun.Star now offers live streaming in high definition for a global audience.


8.
Webcast  - It is the latest innovation in Sun.Star's broadcast experiments.
Developed from scratch, the webcast is in Bisaya and is aired every noon from Monday to Friday.
The newscast provides updates of the day's headlines in video and sound bytes.
The webcast, that runs for 12 to 15 minutes, is available on replay after the live cast.
It was designed to be the lunch companion of Filipinos in the world.


9.
Video channel - Sun.Star is a content partner of YouTube.
It has "Sun.Star Philippines" as its TV channel, hosting video productions from the daily webcast, special features, live streaming videos and news clips of interviews with news sources or of events.
The channel has more than 6,000 subscribers as of May 2015.
A beauty tip video series by Sun.Star's Beauty Enthusiast columnist Joanna Cuenco is among the channel's offerings.
Subscribe to the Sun.Star channel at Sun.Star Philippines on YouTube to get the hottest videos and latest news.


10.
Read monitor - Read time is a usability feature of the new Sun.Star website.
It was designed to keep the user aware of how long it would take him or her to read the article.
It gives the user an idea of whether to read it now or later.
This feature sets user expectations upfront with the estimated time needed to read the articles.
"Reading so far" is another usability feature that guides the audience on how far he or she has read the story - 20 or 50 percent of the article.
11.
Personal to you - The volume of information online is maddening and annoying.
Sun.Star's app -- My Sun.Star -- showcases personalization of user's interests.
It also provides news bits for people on the move, app specific content and the one-touch access to news of your choice.
It is available on the Google Play store and soon on the Apple store.
12.
E-paper - The Sun.Star e-paper or the electronic paper is the exact digital replica of the printed paper.
It gives you the similar flipping experience of a printed paper in a digital platform.
Sun.Star provides a seven-day trial for those who want to try out the service.
With Sun.Star's e-paper service, you can now check your favorite Sun.Star newspaper online anytime, anywhere.
Under Sun.Star's banner are the e-papers of Sun.Star Cebu, Sun.Star SuperBalita Cebu, Sun.Star Davao, Sun.Star Pampanga, Sun.Star Cagayan de Oro, and Sun.Star Baguio.
The Sun.Star Cebu Yearbook and Sun.Star's Bisdak Magasin are also available.
Subscribe now.


13.
Creative advertising - Content is king, Bill Gates once said this and Google popularized it.
The face of online marketing has changed many times and it continues to create a buzz in the industry.
Some companies doing content marketing use social media  to push content about their brand, article posting , in-person events, e-newsletters, case studies, blogs and white papers and webinars.
Seeing these trends, Sun.Star provides creative advertising packages for advertisers.
It now offers sponsored content that allows advertisers to showcase their brand in text, photos, infographics and video, or in multimedia presentation.
It is labeled as sponsored content but the presentation is the same as the news and other information on the Sun.Star website.
Other creative online packages are now available and could be tailored to fit advertisers' needs.
Check with your Sun.Star advertising consultant for details.
14.
Young and dynamic staff - The people behind these digital improvements of Sun.Star are not just young and dynamic but passionate, dedicated and well-educated.
The Sun.Star Network Exchange  is the office that manages the digital innovations of the Sun.Star media group.
It is an office of 21 people, including a reportorial team in Manila, a perfect mix of young journalism graduates and experienced journalists from top universities like University of the Philippines, Ateneo de Manila, and Harvard University.
The team handles website updating, webcast, multimedia reports, live streaming, and social media campaigns.
Meet the people behind the Sun.Star website.


15.
You - The innovations and creations of Sun.Star are for you, our readers.
We appreciate the comments you left behind and the feedback on our new products and services, as they allow us to work some more and improve our creations.
We also value your appreciation of what we do to inspire us to do better.
Online innovations make Sun.Star future-proof, Online innovations make Sun.Star future-proof
Sun.Star digital products
Jad A.
Conde, WHEN it comes to taking community newspapers to the next level, Sun.Star never fails to exceed expectations.
The media company based in Cebu City has been keeping up with the times to remain relevant and useful amid the rapidly-changing digital landscape.
It has undertaken innovative efforts to match the profound and positive changes in the industry - proof of this is www.sunstar.com.ph, whose design has gone from being fixed to responsive, providing an optimal viewing experience for mobile users.
Sun.Star is also excited to introduce its newest mobile application that will serve its readers, advertisers, and community.
As Sun.Star Network Exchange  editor-in-chief Nini Cabaero puts it, the trick is to be up to the challenge.
"These innovations make us future-proof." As the whole media landscape changes, Sun.Star digs into its core competence - community journalism - as it ventures into digital territory.
New web design
Sun.Star is the first Philippine community newspaper company to go online.
It started as a Sun.Star Cebu website, then was converted into a network website at the same URL, www.sunstar.com.ph, on May 10, 2000, through Sunnex, new media department of the Sun.Star Publishing Inc.
Francis June Ygot, Sunnex web technology officer, said the website must adapt to new digital trends and should embody the latest technologies that not only matter to the business but also to its readers and subscribers.

The Sun.Star website underwent three major design modifications in 2015 alone, transforming it into a more user-friendly layout.
The website aims to achieve an optimal user experience that the design was simplified and it is now easier to navigate.
"The bigger job is to keep it updated and maintained," Ygot said.
"Constant technical supervision plays a very important role in the execution of the company's mission.
This would definitely help increase web presence."
Fresh materials added regularly to the website, accompanied by live streaming of events and video reporting of breaking news, also help increase online performance.
Mobile platform
Sun.Star's commitment to providing the public with news and information at whatever platform leads to the birth of its own dedicated mobile application aptly called, My Sun.Star.
In her one-year fellowship at Harvard University in 2013 - 2014 to study journalism innovations, Cabaero said she found a clear direction to come up with a mobile application separate from the website.
"People spend more time on their mobile devices to look for what is relevant to their daily lives.
They would prefer to go to one application to serve them what they want.
They do not want the online clutter; they want what is only relevant to them," Cabaero said.
Thus, My Sun.Star was added to the Sun.Star family.
Sun.Star understands the need to move toward a greater newspaper reinvention in order to remain ahead of the game.
The launch of My Sun.Star shows that the publication is fearless to push its brand on a different platform accomplished with an innovative and forward-thinking approach.

Sun.Star is following closely the mobile trend path to keep abreast of the complex and evolving mobile community.
The poet Robert Frost called it "the road not taken." A trek solely for the independent, brave and courageous.
Mobile mindset
But an effective mobile application involves more than just a mobile-friendly strategy.
To ensure its mobile presence, it should also understand the mobile mindset of consumers.
My Sun.Star addresses the need for content, form and structure different from its website and responsive mobile site.
My Sun.Star will have a daily summary of the news around the nation in its News Bits section.
Content will be personalized, based on the reader's preference.
Services not available on the website will be introduced on the mobile application.

The mobile application also offers services like Properties, Jobs, Lotto and Obituaries.
"Content on the website may be used on the mobile application, but not everything on the mobile application may be used on the website," Cabaero said.
My Sun.Star, available on the Google Play and Apple store, covers the most important stories from Sun.Star newspapers and networks in 12 major cities around the country.
These are Manila, Baguio, Pampanga and Pangasinan in Luzon; Cebu, Bacolod, Iloilo, Dumaguete, and Tacloban in the Visayas; and Davao, Cagayan de Oro and Zamboanga in Mindanao.
News and information are in English and Bisaya.
Google unveils Android's latest technological tricks, Google unveils Android's latest technological tricks
David Singleton, director at Android Wear, speaks during the Google I/O 2015 keynote presentation in San Francisco, Thursday, May 28, 2015.

SAN FRANCISCO 2014 Google's next version of its Android operating system will boast new ways to fetch information, pay merchants and protect privacy on mobile devices as the Internet company duels with Apple in the quest to make their technology indispensable.
The upgrade will give Android's personal assistant, Google Now, expanded powers of intuition that may be greeted as a great convenience to some and a tad too creepy for others.
Most of the renovations unveiled Thursday at Google's annual developers' conference won't be available until late summer or early fall, around the same time that Apple is expected to release the latest overhaul of the iOS software that powers the iPhone and iPad.
The annual changes to Android and iOS are becoming increasingly important as people become more dependent on smartphones to manage their lives.
Android holds about an 80 percent share of the worldwide smartphone market, with iOS a distant second at 16 percent, according to the research firm International Data Corp.
Both Google and Apple are vying to make their products even more ubiquitous by transplanting much of their mobile technology into automobiles and Internet-connected televisions and appliances.
Google hopes to play a prominent role in the management of home security and appliances with a new operating system called Brillo that will interact with Android devices.
Here's a closer look at some of the key features in the upcoming Android upgrade, currently known simply as "M'':
NOW ON TAP
Google Now currently learns a user's interests and habits by analyzing search requests and scanning emails so it can automatically present helpful information, such as the latest news about a favorite sports team or how long it will take to get to work.
With the M upgrade, users will be able to summon Google Now to scan whatever content might be on a mobile device's screen so it can present pertinent information about the topic of a text, a song, a video clip or an article.
The new Android feature, called "Now on Tap," will be activated by holding down the device's home button or speaking, "OK Google," into the microphone.
That action will prompt Now on Tap to scan the screen in attempt to figure out how to be the most helpful.
Or, if speaking, users can just say what they are seeking, such as "Who sings this?"
Google is hoping to provide Android users with what they need at the precise moment they need it without forcing them to hopscotch from one app to another.
MOBILE PAYMENT DO-OVER
Android M will include an alternative to the mobile payment system that Apple introduced last fall.
Google's response, called Android Pay, will replace Google Wallet for making mobile purchases in stores and applications.
Google Wallet, which came out in 2011, will still work for sending payments from one person to another.
Like Apple's system, Android Pay can be used to store major credit and debit cards in smartphones that can be used to pay merchants equipped with terminals that work with the technology.
Android Pay will also work on devices running on the KitKat and Lollipop versions of Android released the past two years.
PROTECTING PRIVACY
Android M will be compatible with fingerprint scanners so device users can verify their identities by pressing a button instead of entering a passcode.
Apple's iPhones began using a fingerprint reader in 2013.
Besides supporting fingerprint scanners, Android M will make it easier to users to prevent mobile applications from grabbing their personal information.
Permission will only need to be granted to each app if the access is needed for a specific action.
That means Android users won't be asked to share information about their contact lists, photo rolls or locations until an app won't work without it.

A mother, a teacher, A mother, a teacherJeepy P.
Compio, A TEACHER often comes to work when it is still dark outside, leave when it is dark again and this she does every school day.
But this is the challenge that teacher Nelda Boco-Navarro basks in for the more than three decades of being a pre-school teacher.
Her inspiration comes from the children who learn and start to understand more from what she teachers.

"Dili lalim ang trabaho sa usa ka magtutudlo, ikaw ang motindog nga inahan sa imong mga estudyante, diha sa nagkalain-lain nga mga batasan nga kinahanglan nimong sabton ,201d she said.
Challenged and practiced through her years of service, she already knew the A-Z essentials on how to handle her pupils with grace, dedication and compassion -- the reason she is dubbed as the "mother of all mothers" in her barangay.
"Akong maingon, inahan gyud kay ang mga estudyante nako karon, mga anak man ni sa akong mga estudyante sa una.
Diri nako kaayo nabati kung unsa ang papel sa usa ka inahan pinaagi sa ilang gi-share nako nga mga stories nga sila niadto ang nilingkod sa akong atubangan unya karon ila na sab nga mga anak ,201d she added.
Ma'am Navarro, who is from Katugasan, Cabadbaran City, Agusan del Norte, was raised by an overseas Filipino worker  and a full-time mother of nine.
Right after high school, she pursued her dreams and finished Bachelor of Elementary Education  at Northern Mindanao Colleges of Agusan del Norte in 1989.
She left her hometown to find opportunities in Davao City where she got married, begot two children and also started her lifelong vocation as a pre-school teacher.
She was invited to be a teacher in Project Home when she was living in Bankerohan.

Thus, in 1990, Navarro started her career as teacher at Project Hope Day Care Center in Barangay 5-A, Bankerohan, Davao City.
At that time, Project Hope was under the City Mayors' Office.

"Diri na gyud ko ani nga profession, bugtong recognition na lang namo ani kanang bisan moingon ang mga ginikanan nga 'salamat ma'am' kay nakat-on ang akong anak ,201d Navarro said.
With her dedication, commitment and passion to teach, Ma'am Nelda received various recognitions and commendations, one of these is the Grand slam Outstanding Day-care Worker and the Level 5 accreditation of Barangay 5-A Project Hope by the Department of Social Welfare and Development  can also be attributed to the efforts she exerted in her profession.
She gives the same lavish care to her children, even opens her house to all her children2019s friends.
"Bahala'g ingnon nga orphanage ang balay nga mapuno sa barkada sa akong mga anak, basta ipakita sab nako sa ilaha nga gi-amigo nako sila, aron di ko layo nila ,201d she added.
Painting the town at Boys Town, Painting the town at Boys Town201cSHARING life2019s blessings is an empowering experience for a practicing artist, it drives the inner spirit to continue and be at unison with the universe,201d is the gist of the message given by Kublai Millan while facilitating the art workshop at Boys Town.

Indeed, acquiring artistic skills and practicing such aesthetic discipline is simply not enough for an artist with a positive advocacy in life.
That it is essential to share the acquired talent in art for it can be a threshold for everybody, including the artist, to gaze at life with optimism.

There are many ways of spreading optimism, and organizing an art workshop even for a short period of time is one among them.
Paint the town at Boys Town as Kublai would call it, is a two meaningful day art workshop held at Boys Town, Ma-a, Davao City on May 21 and 22.

The workshop is spearheaded by Kublai Millan and assisted by Jeff Bangot, Anton CadayonaIII, JunCayas and Victor Dumaguing, while the needed paints are supported by Raymond T.
Yu, Edison Oribiana, Dan Samonte and Shy Sotomil of Rain or Shine Elastomeric Waterproofing Paint by Asian Coatings Phils., Incorporated.

The project is warmly welcomed by the Welfare Action Foundation of Davao, Incorporated especially by Rev.
Fr.
Alan Ross p.
Banogon, SDB, Executive Director and Bro.
Antonio Hopida, SDB, Asst.
Executive Director.

Hence, the act or call for this positive art advocacy are answered by these likeminded people, a pro-active partnership for the young boys of Boys Town.
As a result, besides the colorful paintings of the young boys are the sweet smiles and unfading appreciation from their faces simply exhibiting the words 201cThank You.201d At our heart2019s delight, our minds are telling us that there will be more of this kind in the nearest future.

2 Mindanao students win global competition in Rome, 2 Mindanao students win global competition in Rome
WINNING ENTRIES.
 These are the designs that Carmila Marie M.
Santos and Raida Kasim Esmael, 12, from Dadtumeg Elementary School in Kabuntalan town in Maguindanao created which is among the 20 designs that won in the World Food Programme Children's Design Global Competition held in Rome, Italy on February 26, 2015.
The competition was anchored on the theme: Zero Hunger: Infinite Possibilities.
 
Richel V.
Umel, KOLAMBUGAN, Lanao del Norte 2013 Carmila Santos, 12, a student of Guillermo A.
Gemino Elementary School in this municipality, brought honor, fame and pride not only for Kolambugan people but in the entire Filipino nation.
Baicon Macaraya, sub-office Head of the World Food Programme  in Iligan City, told Sun.Star Cagayan de Oro that Carmila participated in the WFP Children's Design Global Competition using pastel colors.

The competition was anchored on the theme: Zero Hunger: Infinite Possibilities.
Macaraya said 150 schools children from the provinces of Lanao del Norte and Sur joined the first level of the competition on February 26, 2015.
 
There were 150 entries and the WFP staff that acted as judges chose only five which included Carmila2019s design that qualified for the national level.

At the national level competition, 13 participants competed with only eight designs selected by the WFP Philippines staff to qualify for the international level in Rome, Italy, the home of the WFP, Macaraya said.

She added that these eight designs selected for international entry included designs from Mindanao participants, three from Cotabato City and two from Iligan City.
Carmila2019s piece ranked among the top five and was sent to Rome.
At the WFP Headquarters in Rome, Macaraya said there were 23 country offices that participated in the competition with 115 art works on show.
Among the 115 works of art, the panel of judges from the WFP Headquarters chose 20 which included Carmila2019s piece and Raida Kasim Esmael, 12, from Dadtumeg Elementary School in Kabutalan town in Maguindanao.

Jasline Masbud, WFP staff at Iligan sub-office, said, "Carmila and the rest of the artists will receive USD100 prize each and their respective schools at USD200 to purchase stationery equipment.
The WFP Iligan sub-office will hold a recognition and simple awarding ceremony for Santos once the awards and prizes will arrive from Rome, Masbud said.

Based on guidelines, the design will be used for calendars, desk diaries, post cards and other merchandise equipment.
Inspiration
Cristelito and wife Meriam Santos, Carmila's parents who are farmers, told their daughter few days before the competition to include rice 2018palay2019 and corn in her design.
"Ayaw kalimti ug drawing ang humay ug mais kay mao na ang pagkaon sa mga tawo sa kalibutan ,201d Carmila2019s parents said.

"Amo syang gidasig nga kung unsa2019y iyang maayo nga mahuna-hunaan i-lakip nga makadugang ug kanindot sa disenyo og ipadayag ,201d Carmila2019s father said.
 
Carmila thanked her coach and mentor Marie Stele Salac and her school principal, Brenda Gayanelo, who were behind nurturing their collective efforts as they formulated the creative design.

"Wa ko mag dahum nga makaabot akong design sa international level sa competition diin usa kini sa 20 nga napili.
Gi-pahibalo lang ko sa akong mga higala diha sa Facebook nga napili akong design sa Rome, Italy ,201d Carmila said.
 
Evacuee
Carmila was among the children evacuees at the height of Kolambugan siege on August 18, 2008 after the Supreme Court declared the Memorandum Of Agreement between government and the Moro Islamic Liberation Front unconstitutional.
Carmila said "I was Grade 1 at that time when we left our place and fled to Ozamiz City to avoid getting into crossfire.
Sana iiral na ang na tunay na kapayapaan at wala nang gyera at wala nang magbakwit .201d 
Mayor Lorenzo Manegos of once a conflict-torn Kolambugan, lauded Santos for bringing the fame not only to Kolambugan but the entire country as well.
"We will give honor and recognition to Carmila Marie Santos on July 1 as we celebrate our charter day," Manegos said.
Manegos said although Kolambugan town is not part of the proposed expanded Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao he is optimistic that the approval of the Bangsamoro Basic Law would the key toward sustainable peace in Mindanao.

"Sustainable peace, food security and education are among the major contributory factors toward socio-economic development," Manegos added.
A model of peace and unity, A model of peace and unityRuji Peter S.
Abat, DESPITE the preconceived thought that the Maguindanao province is generally riddled with conflicts due to the presence of rebel groups and cultural and religious differences, a community in the municipality of South Upi where indigenous peoples , Muslims and Christians coexist has become a model of peace, as they have worked together to promote development in their barangay.

At Sitio Iking, Barangay Romongaob, a community composed of ethnic group Teduray, Moro people, mostly Maguindanaoans, and Christians have learned to set aside their cultural and religious biases.
The Romongaob Tri-People's Organization , a group organized through the collaboration of the Mindanao Trust Fund , Bangsamoro Development Agency , the Office of the Presidential Adviser on the Peace Process  and the local government, was organized in 2013 with a goal of fostering unity among different ethnic and religious groups, as well as improving the quality of the residents' lives amid the ongoing armed conflicts in their area.
RTPO president and a Moro local Jade Omar told Sun.Star Davao in an interview that their community has long been bombarded by the conflicts between the Moro Islamic Liberation Front  and government forces, and this has greatly affected their main source of income, which is corn farming.
"Ilang beses na kaming nag-evacuate at malaki ang epekto nito sa aming pangkabuhayan dahil naiiwan namin ang aming mga pananim.
Ang dagdag pa sa problema ay iyong kakulangan sa kagamitan sa pagsaka ," Omar said.
Barangay Romongaob chairman and Association of Barangay Captains  president Reynalbert Insular, in a separate interview, said there has long been unity among the different tribes and religions in the barangay, yet the armed conflicts that have been going on since the 70's has disturbed this harmony.
"Nagkakaroon tuloy ng mga conflicts ang mga tribo dahil sa mga land disputes.
Ang nangyayari kasi ay pag naiwan nila ang kanilang mga lupang pinagtataniman dahil sa giyera, pagbalik ay nahihirapan na silang i-identify kung alin ang sa kanila lalo na pag nasira ang mga boundaries, ," Insular said.
Children have also been greatly affected by the conflicts, as Perlita Laugan, RTPO secretary and a Teduray tribal member, said they find it difficult to send their children to school since their income are significantly lowered after they leave their farms whenever an encounter breaks out.
For RTPO procurement chairman Rodolfo Toriales, being a Christian in an area dominated by IPs has not been a problem as he has learned to adapt to the different traditions and practices of the Teduray and the Muslims.
But he pointed out that the war has been the root cause of poverty in their barangay.
Through the MTF and BDA projects focused on implementing community-driven development in conflict-affected areas, the RTPO had a stronger grasp of unity and this has given them hope that their lives will prosper once they work together.
After going through a series of trainings tackling on values enhancement, financial management, logistics and leadership, the RTPO was able to identify the issues in the community level and how they could manage them.
While the armed conflict has been the primary problem, the RTPO has focused on the surrounding issues of poverty and its corresponding effects to health and education.
MTF program manager and senior social development specialist of the World Bank Matthew Stephens, in a separate interview, said: "The beneficiaries had the liberty to choose the project they want to implement and in the case of RTPO whose livelihood is focused on corn farming, they chose to have a warehouse and solar dryer where they could store their corn harvests."
Other than the storing facility, the MTF has already provided RTPO with traveling corn shellers.
RTPO is part of the different areas in South Upi that has received a total of P406,135.60 for farming tools, P1,264,493.29 for warehouses built solar dryers and P1,762,933.34 for separate solar dryers from MTF, which amasses donations from various international donors.
With the solar dryer, the quality of the grains is maintained, thus giving higher value for the harvest.

The facility and equipment also paved the way for the RTPO to have savings in transporting their products and paying different warehouse handlers in different Sitios now that they have their own.
On top of that, the corn sheller itself is income generating as RTPO collects P10 per use, which the RTPO utilizes for its maintenance and to pay the operator.
 
"We have made agreements which have resulted to the crafting of policies in the use of the facility and equipment and how its proceeds will be used.
It shows that even a small community like ours can understand each other despite our different culture and religion," Toriales added.
Laugan said that with increased income from their harvest as post-harvest losses are drastically reduced, they can now afford to send their children to school.

She also pointed out that through RTPO, gender equality has been promoted in their barangay, saying: "The women of RTPO has equal rights with the men since we also have a big role in making plans and implementing the projects in the barangay.
We are also hands on and what men do here, we women also do."
On the issue of land disputes, Insular said that tensions have eased because of the RTPO.
"It has become easier to mediate because they already know that they have a common goal which is to bring development in the barangay," he said.
Microsoft Windows 10, with mobile in mind, arrives in July , Microsoft Windows 10, with mobile in mind, arrives in July NEW YORK 2014 Microsoft will roll out the latest version of its Windows operating system at the end of July.
The company said Monday that Windows 10 is designed with mobile computing in mind, allowing users to switch seamlessly between personal computers, tablets, smartphones and other gadgets.
The operating system is intended to give apps a similar feel on all devices and comes with a new Web browser integrated with Cortana, the company's voice-activated answer to Apple's Siri.
Microsoft Corp.
says Windows 10 will be available in 190 countries as a free upgrade on July 29 for anyone currently running Windows 8.1 or 7, the two previous versions of the software.

New 'Fifty Shades' book quickly tops best-seller lists, New 'Fifty Shades' book quickly tops best-seller lists
This image provided by Vintage Books shows the cover of the new book, "Grey," the fourth novel in E L James' multimillion-selling 201cFifty Shades of Grey201d erotic series.
Told from the point of view of billionaire Christian Grey, whose explicit romance with young Anastasia Steele became an international obsession, the book is scheduled to be released June 18, 2015.

NEW YORK -- Once again, E L James is on top.
A day after announcing that she had written a "Fifty Shades" novel from billionaire Christian Grey's point of view, "Grey" was No.
1 on Amazon.com and Barnes & Noble.com as of midday Tuesday.
James' "Fifty Shades of Grey" trilogy, the explicit romance between Grey and young Anastasia Steele, has sold more than 100 million copies worldwide.
The author said in a statement Monday that her new book, coming out June 18, was in response to numerous fan requests that she tell Christian's side of the story.

Beating life2019s rhythm, Beating life2019s rhythmAce June Rell S.
Perez, DUBBED as the "Beatbox King" of the Philippines, a 19-year-old proud human beatbox Dabawenyo awed the country and even the world, as he blurred the line between human and robot through his unique and entertaining human beatbox talent.
Hailed as the 2014 Ultimate Talentadong Pinoy Champion and semi-finals qualifier of the 1st Asia2019s Got Talent , Neil Rey Garcia Llanes remains grounded amid all the fame and victory he is now earning.
201cUntil now, I really can2019t believe that I made it this far.
Before, I2019m just doing this inside our bathroom but now, I am performing already to millions of people.
I thank God for this opportunity, I must share this blessing and continue inspire people,201d the human beatbox king expressed his gratitude.
He admits that he lived a life that was out of beat.
Both his parents were unemployed and they lived in what he described as 201csemi-squatter area.201d His older brother lived with an aunt, to lighten the load.
201cSa una si Papa naga-sideline lang na og luto pero katong nakahibalo nako mo-beatbox, naa nako2019y mga gig ug rakets, akong kita mao na na akong ginagamit panggasto sa balay ug akong pangbaon ,201d he said.
The youngest of two, Neil became the breadwinner in the family at the age of 12 through performing.
He was able to enroll in college because of his grandmother who is a teacher.
201cMy biggest dream is really to finish in college and earn a bachelor2019s degree.
Because when the time comes when I am no longer good in human beatboxing, I can still be proud of myself since I finished college.
My college diploma will still be the best gift I can give to myself and my parents,201d he said.
This is the very reason he was not among the Philippine contenders in the semifinals of the First Asia2019s Got Talent show in Malaysia, despite making it.
He wowed the judges at the audition, earned himself a standing ovation from the judges and a quick trip to the semi-finals.

201cI was so happy when I got the news from AGT that I qualified to the semi-finals of the competition.
Only 24 of us will proceed to the semi-finals from hundreds who auditioned.
Unfortunately, the AGT2019s schedule is in conflict with my studies, sayang ang opportunity but my study is still my top priority, especially now that I am a year away from my graduation,201d Neil said.
201cSo I decided to drop the chance for the first season, finish first my studies, and audition again for the next season,201d he added with hope and enthusiasm.
At a very young age, Neil was able to buy his family a lot and plans to build a house, which will eventually be their home.
201cIt is always my dream to have a house of our own.
Now I am close to that dream.
Indeed, hard work and sacrifice really pays off,201d the artist said.
At present, Neil will continue his study as a graduating student of Bachelor of Science in Business Administration major in Marketing Management at the Holy Cross of Davao College.

201cI perform not just because I want the world to know me but because I want to share my talent and inspire more people around the world,201d the human beatbox said.
201cHindi ko naman madadala ito sa langit kaya habang andito pa gagawain ko ang lahat magamit lang ang talent ko para makapagpasaya ng kapwa ,201d he added.
201cDream and dream until you will achieve it, if not now maybe tomorrow, never get tired of dreaming, keep on beating the rhythms of life and never exit from Life,201d he said.
Life is like human beat boxing, we have to make our own sounds, create a rhythm of happiness, joy and harmony.
No matter how loud or soft it is, what matters is that you created sound waves of love, sacrifice and passion heard by the people around you by keeping the beat on sound.
Going the extra mile, Going the extra mileMaria Gemima C.
Valderrama, 
ELENA Nasiad Meralles, 46, is no ordinary educator and school head.
 As the principal of Bago Elementary School in Barangay Bago Gallera in Davao City for two years now, Elena is stirred to do more than what is needed.
One of her priorities is to promote the involvement of the communities in schools.
 This is the reason why the Busog, Lusog, Talino  program in their school was sustained to end malnutrition among students with below normal nutritional status.
This is also the reason why Elena was recognized nationwide and was given the 2015 Busog, Lusog, Talino Excellence Award.
 This is the first ever awards program by Jollibee Group Foundation  as they start the tradition of honouring exemplary performance of BLT schools all over the country.
For Elena, the BLT program is not just about feeding the children, but it is also about expressing genuine concern and involving strong leadership.
For 120 days, the identified children are given nutritious food daily as their lunch.

Parents prepare the food and at 11:30 in the morning children are called in at the feeding center.
 Attendance is checked to ensure that every identified pupil is around for lunch.
 They wash hands, pray together, and eat together.
As part of training the kids to become responsible, the pupils return the plates to the lavatory after eating.
Some home economics pupils wash the dishes and clean the area.
Elena remembers that a Grade 1 pupil refrained from being absent because the pupil knows they look for her every eating time.
 The feeding program increased her attendance and she became more participative in school.
201cAbout 85 percent of our recipients have increased weight, improved attendance and grades,201d Elena said.
Some parents, Elena said, have learned different recipes as the foundation provides a menu of nutritious but affordable food.
 They can also exercise meal patterns and other best practices like sanitation.
Elena was the principal of Baliok Elementary School for six years before she was transferred to Bago Elementary School.
 Since 2009 when BLT started, Elena designed a sustainability plan where she focused on resource-generation and she continued what she has started in her new school.
She has managed to get a continuing support from the local government unit where a barangay resolution was crafted for the school to be provided 10 sacks of rice a year.
The school also gets 35 percent from its canteen earnings.
The positive attitude of Elena was one of the reasons why Executive Director Gisella Tiongson of JGF was impressed during the visit.
Elena gave full support to the feeding program and all she wanted was a reciprocated full support from partners and the community.
In the first year of implementation in 2009, JGF allocated 11 pesos daily budget for 120 days to 40 identified pupils for the feeding program.
 The year after, they were given 5.50 daily.
 Since principals were trained to link with stakeholders, the remaining years were up to the principal to sustain the program.
They had bridging leadership training and this was where Elena championed among the rest of the implementing schools in the region.
The training put emphasis on ownership and co-ownership of the program.
Tiongson saw how determined Elena was so she reminded their local implementing partner Davao Doctors College to endorse Elena to the committee to undergo screening.
It was the start of a colourful beginning for Elena.
 
She was chosen to represent Mindanao among the best 10 stories in the commemorative book of the foundation distributed during the summit and to be used as inspiring success stories of change.
Only her story and one from Luzon were played and viewed during the awarding last May 5 in Pasig City.
Yes, hers is a story of change.
Elena proved that leadership is about revealing oneself, accepting feedback, and taking the risk.
She showed the community what she wanted for the school, she listened to the needs of the learners and what the community can probably do, and ventured all the possibilities to involve others.

So the last four years of the BLT program where the principal would look for initiatives to sustain the program, Elena was right in the middle involving everyone to open their hearts and mind.
Elena is a superb mother and wife too.
She is a devoted partner to husband Salvador, Jr.
who is a senior fire officer of the Bureau of Fire and Protection in Bangoy Fire Station.
Together they water the family with love along with their children Jamaica, 20; Jethro, 18; and Joshua, 12.
For Elena, love and trust are the assets in the family while positive attitude is the capital in any successful program implementation.
201cWe can have the support of our stakeholders, let2019s all keep every program sustainable,201d  Elena said inspiring educators like her to keep the ball rolling in their school.
Elena2019s going the extra mile is an act of human dignity to do more than is necessary.
This is an act everyone needs to allow hopefulness to rule.

Masbad: Of productivity, fitness and an infographic, Masbad: Of productivity, fitness and an infographic
Image from Getty Images
Roark L.
Masbad, Wacky Tech, Productivity
These days we will almost always be in front of a computer screen -- desktop, laptop, tablet, smartphone.
It2019s ubiquitous and it has permeated every fabric of society.
The workplace is no exception.
If we2019re not too careful, we can even hurt our eyes.
Our eyes can get drier than usual when we2019re staring too long into the computer screen.

This is why taking breaks while at work will always be a good thing.
It doesn2019t matter whether it2019s a 15-minute break or a quick less-than-a-minute break.
Business blog Inc.
published an article about taking micro breaks that can help us all in the workplace.
And if you ask me, this could be applicable as well even outside the workplace.
Read the article here for a more detailed explanation on that.

Fitness and Wearables


That meme says a lot actually.
Things have come a long way in just a decade when it comes to running.
And this is not just with running.
The world of fitness is already inundated by technology in the form of wearable.
Slash Gear has an article that discusses the relationship of fitness and wearables.
It is a perfect match? Will the relationship last?
Infographic: Color Schemes



The makings of recidivists, The makings of recidivistsAce June Rell S.
Perez, re2022cid2022i2022vistnoun
1.
a convicted criminal who reoffends, especially repeatedly.
adjective
1.
denoting a person who repeatedly reoffends.
Fernando.
Not his real name.
15.
Batang hamog .
Now at Bahay Pag-asa in Bago Oshiro, Davao City, Fernando shared why he ended up in the center.
201cI needed to eat or else I2019ll die,201d Fernando shared in the vernacular.
He tried to explain his misdeeds saying he only stole from those he thought were wealthy and can afford to lose some.
According to the United Nations Children's Fund  reports, children who live and work on the streets in the major cities of the country are particularly vulnerable to human trafficking, sexual exploitation, violence, and crime and drug abuse.
Estimates of these children now reach about quarter of a million in major cities.
Unicef records 862 children at risk  and children in conflict with the law , 309 of which were from Davao City, as of 2012.

With this figure, the Davao Region Juvenile Justice and Welfare Committee  was organized.
The committee emanated from the Republic Act No.
10630 which amended Republic Act no.
9344, otherwise known as the "Juvenile Justice and Welfare act of 2006".
The amendments included appropriating funds to address CICL and CAR.
 
According to social worker officer III and RJJWC Davao Region secretariat, Consolacion Abad, the National Juvenile Justice Welfare Committee thru its regional offices provide technical assistance to Local Government Units  on the implementation on the committee2019s program called Community-based Comprehensive Local Intervention on Juvenile Intensive Program .
 
Data at RJJWC Davao Region showed that among the top committed offenses and crime mostly by children are Theft/Robbery/Hold-up/Snatching, alarm and scandal , drugs/substance abuse , and curfew on minors/vagrancy, among others.
RJJWC Davao Region CICL2019s and CAR2019s cases share commonalities: 20 percent are neglected by their parents/families, 10 percent are exposed to domestic violence, 40 percent are OSY, 15 percent are exposed to community violence, 10 percent are influenced by peer pressure, and 5 percent are involved or a member of gang or fraternity.
BahayPag-asa, provided by the RA 10630, refers to a 24-hour child-caring institution established, funded and managed by local government units  and licensed and/or non government organizations  providing short-term residential care for children in conflict with the law who are above 15 but below 18 years of age who are awaiting court disposition of their cases or transfer to other agencies or jurisdiction.

A team composed of a social worker, a psychologist/mental health professional, a medical doctor, an educational guidance counselor and a Barangay Council for the Protection of Children  member operates the Bahay Pag-asa.
The team is tasked to work on each child and the child2019s family individually.

Apart from this, DSWD manages its own Regional Rehabilitation Center for Youth  which served 131 CICL cases during the first half of 2014.
In May, RJJWC Davao Region conducted supervisory and monitoring visit at Davao City2019s Bahay Pag-asa for update on the cases served and programs and activities undertaken by the residents.
The findings: it lacks facilities and manpower due to increase in clients.
The individualized intervention now deemed impossible.
This shows the need for national and local governments to ensure that the structure created by law to protect the rights of children is funded and functional, that the proposed memorandum circular to monitor LGU compliance to Republic Act No.
9344 or the 201cJuvenile Justice and Welfare Act of 2006201d must cover the four major mandates of local governments, which include: the allotment at least one percent of an LGU2019s internal revenue allotment for the Local Councils for the Protection of Children; appointment of a Local Social Welfare and Development Officer to assist children in conflict with the law; development of a local, comprehensive juvenile intervention program; and, the establishment youth homes for CICLs.
As it is, there is but the apprehension, the assistance of the social worker, but there is little done for intervention and diversion, thus the recidivists.
It2019s catch-turnover-release-repeat.
When it should be catch, turnover, divert/rehabilitate, re-integrate.
In-depth report: Second chances , In-depth report: Second chances Kriztja Marae G.
Labrador, JESSA Mae had just graduated college with a bachelor2019s degree in business administration from John Paul II College last March.
A former gang member who frequented the streets more than school, she saw no good in her future and was about ready to just waste away.
But she found support from the Tambayan Center for Children2019s Rights, a non-government organization working with less privileged and discriminated adolescent girls in the street with ages ranging from 9 to 17 years old.
Dysfunctional family
Jessa is the third among six siblings, her father works as a fisherman while her mother is a housewife.
Her parents were always fighting due to scarcity of money.
They cannot even have three meals a day.
She found solace with her friends.
201cMuuli lang ko sa balay para mukaon sa una gikan ug laag, unya pag-abot pa jud sa balay walay pagkaon so mag laag napud uban ang barkada ,201d she said.
Her parents separated when she was in fourth grade.
Her mother went to General Santos City leaving them with her father who was not into caring for them and would just go out fishing.
201cAkong huna-huna kay: asa man ko paadto ani uy, akong mama wala ug akong papa feel nako dili pud maasahan ,201d she added.
With her barkadas in a gang, she would find herself in physical fights with other girl gangs.
These fights would be a free for all; all her fears are forgotten because of the thought that she had nothing to lose anyway.
After two years, her parents got back together, but this did not work out.
Her mother even sought protection order from the barangay to keep their father away.
She saw her dream of a whole family crumbled and school was not enticing as she was bullied there.
Thus, her family was her barkada on the streets.
When she was 14, Jessa2019s friend referred her to Tambayan.
Her main motivation for joining was because there2019s free food and one can also take a bath there.
That was enticement enough.
How they work
Starting way back in 1996 here in Davao City but has now also expanded in Digos City, Tambayan, according to Carla Canarias, Tambayan advocacy officer, had developed a holistic approach to street adolescents; not as somebody to extend charity to, but as a partner in their growth.
201cWe treat children not as objects but as partners knowing that children have their own abilities to decide.
They have brilliant ideas but they have to be given opportunities to enhance their talents because in the first place, they know what they want,201d she said in the vernacular.
To change a child, it is not enough to just encourage the child to change.
The community itself has to change.
Jessa started to be a part of their educational assistance when she was in high school.
Girls who opt to return to school get school supplies, uniforms, and school shoes during the beginning of the school year.

If they reach October without dropping out, they get a small allowance as incentive, P25 a day.
This assistance is a partnership between the parents and teachers to ensure and motivate the child to stay in school and for the parents to also get involved along the way.
Canarias said the children do not require to maintain a certain grade in school to get assistance.
All the girls need to do is stay in school.
Every end of the year, Tambayan holds 'Pagdayeg', a recognition program for all who finish a school year.
The girls are treated to a field trip as well.
From the less than 50 percent who made it through one school year when they first started their education assistance, now, survival rate in school is 70 percent.
Those who were assisted in high school are offered further assistance for tertiary education 2013 this can be a college course or a technical-vocational course.

Jessa, is the first four-year coursed graduate supported by Tambayan, she is also the first in their family to finish college.
Other than their educational assistance, Tambayan also conducts different workshops for their children contacts from time to time.
Changing the community landscape
Now 22, Jessa said that Tambayan helped her regain her self-esteem.
"They made us feel important through their support and providing for our needs in school even in our projects.
We feel that they want us to graduate," Jessa said in the vernacular.
She added that with the intervention of Tambayan, which makes it a point to include parents in all their girls2019 activities, she became closer to her mother.
The sad part, however, is her mother died before she could graduate.
Canarias said that they are doing what they can do to create an impact in the community, because like other non-government organizations, they cannot stay 201cforever201d as they are just living out through support.
201cWe look forward to the time when our projects and services are replicated by the community, by the barangays themselves,201d she said.
As for Jessa, the community who used to pull her down and discouraged her to dream now respects her.
She now looks forward to landing her first job and showing the other girls that there is a better future for them.
201cDili tanan na niagi dira, dira ra ,201d she said.
Diversion and the CICLs, Diversion and the CICLsKarina V.
Canedo, CHILDREN in Conflict with Law or the CICLs have reached the total number of 331 this quarter with only 60 in shelters.
What is the life of the CICLs outside the bars where they are exempted?
Are they truly as free as others have assumed?
According to an interview with Davao City Social Development Officer Ms.
Gina A.
Moron, CSSDO child and youth focal/technical person this is not the case.
 
"When you say Juvenile Justice there is no children that can be imprisoned that is the basic concept of the law.
Because it is restorative, it means the children 15 below can't be filed a case but he will be given intervention which means that he/she will be given back to his/her family of course with the assessment of the social workers.
The social workers will hold them.
If the child is 15 up and would become a CICL, he/she will undergo diversion," Moron said in the vernacular.
According to her the involvement of the parents, barangay and the community are also included in the process.
In diversion, the barangay council and social workers are tasked to work together where the CICL is supposed to do some community volunteer work.
"Aside from that child will undergo activities where he or she could realize their accountability," she added.

There is also a number of hours for community work given.
This is determined through a negotiation with the barangay, the parents, the CICL and the social workers.
The child should be properly consulted on how much time he can really dedicate to community work, this is aside from his or her daily reporting to the social worker assigned.
"They have journals .
Aside from that social workers also do psychosocial intervention which means that the there is a constant visit with the child and there is also a follow up in counseling which the child must have constant attendance," she added.
Children aged 15 up can undergo diversion within the community or in a shelter.
This will depend on the gravity of the crime committed.
Those who committed heinous crimes stay at the shelters since they are more at risk.
The shelter is actually another service of the CSSDO.
One shelter they have is the Bahay Pag-asa located in Talomo.
According to Moron they also house children who have used illegal drugs and aid their rehabilitation.
Like all other CICL are still undergoing diversion.
Like all other the agreements, diversion also has a period of six months.

"But, it depends upon the capability of the child to transform.
He can cope fast he can shorten then diversion period is shorted.
But there is also the possibility that the six-month will lapse without much development and so the process will have to be repeated.
But we have a limit, of course there is a limit," Moron said.
Even if there is an enough ratio social workers to handle their cases in the entire Davao City, the CSSDO City Social Development Officer Ms.
Gina A.
Moron in the end encouraged parents and the community to help and establish effective measures and not to turn a blind eye on the existence of a number of the CICLs in the city.
In-depth report: From crime to sports , In-depth report: From crime to sports Karlo Paolo R.
Pates, FROM pestering random strangers for "abuloy" and getting into trouble for theft and robbery, the boys from the Foundation of Balay Pasilungan Inc.
have found a new home and playground in various sports activities, particularly rugby football and basketball.

Albert, 14, Reymart, 14, and Michael, 16, are three of 29 kids who are cared for by Balay Pasilungan, a charity shelter center founded in 1989 for street kids that is administered by the Society of Mary-Marist Fathers and Brothers.
Foundation of Balay Pasilungan Inc.
project manager Alejandro P.
Cadagdagon Jr., in an interview at their office, said that each kid under their custody have their own tragic story to tell, saying: "Most of them have already experienced traumatic stages of life.
Some of them are battered children while some already have criminal records." 
Some of the boys at Balay Pasilungan were turned over by the Department of Social Welfare and Development  after their committing crimes.
Some of them are abandoned while some have no families to go to.
"Here in Balay Pasilungan, we have two types of programs focused on kids 14 years old and below and 16 years old and above.
The programs specifically designed for kids 14 years old and below are more on the psychological ones while the 16 years old and above programs are more into developing the skills of each kid," Cadagdagon said.
Aside from their regular and routine activities at their center and school, they also allow the kids to participate in extra-curricular activities such as sports every weekend.
"Gipaapil namo sila ani na activities kay kabalo mi mao ning way para maipagawas nila ilang stress and problema pinaagi sa dula.
Ug gusto pud namo sila makakat-on ug values ," he added.
Albert, Reymart, and Michael said that since sports was introduced to them, they have been playing touch-rugby football in different venues every Saturday.
Michael, the oldest among the three of them and a grade 7 student of DCNHS, said, "Gusto pud ko makaexperience sa rugby football mao muapil gyud ko.
Pasalamat pud ko kay coach Blessie kay gihatagan ko ug opportunity ."
Reymart, a grade four student of Wireless Elementary School, said he is more inclined toward basketball.

"I join the games because they're fun)," Reymart said in the vernacular.
These kids may have experience a lot hardships and struggles but deep inside their hearts lie a positive and winning mindset.
Having experienced competitions in touch rugby football during the last Araw ng Dabaw sports activities, Reymart has his own interpretation of the word champion, "Dili man importante ug dili kelangan na mudaog gayud ka.
Mas importante na nalingaw ka, gibuhat nimo imong best ug wala ka nanikas ."
But for Albert, a grade five student of Wireless ES, medals and certificates just show you are a champion.
When asked about what values they learned after playing basketball and touch-rugby football, Michael replied: "Natun-an nako na importante gayud diay kaayo ang teamwork para ka mudaog ."
Cadagdagon said he is happy to see how these three boys have matured in the less than one year they have been with Balay Pasilungan.

"This is the main reason on why we allow them in this kind of avenue.
We wanted them to learn the values of sportsmanship and above all friendship," he said.
All three of them, however, dream of becoming professionals.
Michael wants to be a seaman.
Reymart, on the other hand, dreams to be an engineer while Albert wants to be an officer of the Armed Forces of the Philippines.
"We just need to focus on our studies for us to achieve goals.
Poverty is not a reason for us not to succeed," Michael said with a smile.

Cadagdagon said that they are most thankful that through all these years, the boys sent to them have transformed for the better.
"None from them have incurred bad records ever since they've stayed here in the center."
Over the past two years, the City Government of Davao, through the Sports Development Division of the City Mayor's Office along with other connecting agencies, has conducted several programs for children-in-conflict-with-law including the Midnight Basketball Cup and inter-barangay youth basketball league.
Cops2019 expanded role beyond just arresting, Cops2019 expanded role beyond just arrestingIvy C.
Tejano, ONE of the most contentious issues these days is the Children in Conflict with the Law  and the Juvenile Justice System of the country.
The recidivists, or those who commit crimes over and over again and find themselves at the police station, have become familiar faces, driving policemen to find some ways beyond just arresting and turning over children to the social workers.
Last month, two boys -- a 14-year-old and a 16-year-old -- were arrested after they killed a 15-year-old boy along Daang Patnubay in Ecoland in Davao City.
Talomo police identified the victim as Ronan Anoba Telbangco, a resident of Barangay 76-A Bucana.
He succumbed to multiple stab wounds in different parts of his body.
Initial investigation conducted by the Talomo police showed that the victim along with his friends was walking on a street when suspects approached and stabbed Telbangco.
Telbangco died while undergoing medical treatment at a hospital, while Jo and Al  were taken to Department of Social Welfare and Development .
As the problem on children in conflict with the law worsens, Davao City Mayor Rodrigo Duterte could not hold his temper and blamed it to former Senator Francis Pangilinan.
Duterte said the "Republic Act 9344 or Juvenile Justice and Welfare System" authored by Pangilinan has caused additional trouble to local government nationwide.
Pangilinan, who is the Food Security and Agricultural Modernization assistant, was hit by the mayor following the crimes incidents committed by the children nationwide.
The Philippines did not give much attention to CICL until 2006 when the 9344 passed.
With the Republic Act 9344, children under ages 15 could not be charged with a crime.
For 15 to 18 year old juvenile, diversion proceedings away from court are the preferred method for responding to the crimes that carry a possible sentence of six years or less.
"It's the Pangilinan Law that messed up with this until now.
What is really bugging the peace and order is the crime incidents committed by some children," Duterte said.
Before the law was amended by Pangilinan, children were locked up in jail with adults, may it be due to major or petty crimes.
Duterte have been persistent about amending the juvenile justice law again, blaming it as behind the rising of crime incidents committed by the CICL.
Last year, the Davao City Police Office  reported about 30 percent of the crime index here is committed by the youth offenders.
DCPO Director Vicente Danao Jr.
said most of the crimes committed were robbery and theft, adding that most suspects are habitual offenders.

"Until now, ganun pa rin, nasa 25-30 percent of the crime index were committed by the youth offenders," Danao said.
"Ganun pa man, we are still thankful na mababa ang crime volume natin this year than 2014...
mataas pa rin ang crime solution ng ating kapulisan," he added.
The police authorities observed based on the records that most CICL comes from poor families, and have stopped studying.
The youngest is 10 years old.
"Poverty is the number one reason kung bakit merong youth offenders.
May iba pa na ang mga matatanda ang nag-uutos sa bata para gawin ang hindi tama," Danao said.
Some of the youth offenders have families; some were only raised by relatives or some syndicates who only used them to commit crimes, Danao said.
Another problem reported is the "gangsterism," which gives children access to alcohol, solvent, and even drugs, offering temporary escape but pushes them to commit crimes.
The country is home to over 11,000 CICL since 2009, according to the Juvenile Justice and Welfare Council, adding that most of them are from low-income families.
Just like the other concerned citizens and government authorities, Danao believes that these children deserve a second chance to become productive members of the society.
 Thus, the Davao City Police Office's has its "Adopt A Child Program" for the CICL.
He said instead of punishment, the program focuses more on rehabilitation.
 
Just this month, the DCPO, in coordination with Human and Environmental Resource College, distributed school supplies to over 30 CICL under its office.

Talomo Police Station has also the same program, Danao said, adding that the station is now helping around 150 youth offenders.
"I already encourage other police precincts here to do the same, if not to solve, at least to lessen children from committing crimes.
Pero sana makatulong talaga ito," he said.
The DCPO personnel, in partnership with the various stakeholders, assured to continue its program while everybody is waiting for the amendment of the Juvenile Justice Law.
In-depth report: It2019s not the end , In-depth report: It2019s not the end Ruji Peter S.
Abat, WHILE minors aging from 15 to 17 may face criminal liabilities in court, it's not the end line for them, as they are still given the chance to make the necessary change in lifestyle that could lead to the dismissal of the case and ultimately their development as a person.
City Social Services and Development Office  Davao City first district social work associate Janet Jabines, a barangay social worker assigned in monitoring CICLs who have pending cases in court, told Sun.Star Davao in an interview that children in conflict with the law  who are facing charges in court can avoid serving their sentence if they sign a contract.
The contract, Jabines said, contains the provisions of the diversion program, which will be implemented by the CSSDO, Department of Social Welfare and Development  and other concerned agencies while its implementation will be supervised by the courts.
Most CICLs, who were found to be acting with discernment in committing a crime, are placed under the custody of the Bahay Pag-asa in Tugbok District during the pendency of their case.
Social workers could then recommend for the suspension of the case in court and the discharge of a minor once a CICL is deemed to be performing well.
The judge then calls for a hearing to discuss the terms of the contract while the CSSDO prepares the diversion program to be implemented.
Once approved, a minor will then be reintegrated back to the community.
Admin officer for Barangay 23-C Mini-Forest Norane Macaalang, in a separate interview, said that prior to the release of a child, they conduct interviews and seminars on the parents once they get word that a minor is set to be discharged from the Bahay Pag-asa.
"The child will have a difficult time complying with the program if the parents or guardians are not prepared.
That is why we also interview and conduct seminars to parents so that they could also monitor the child," Macaalang said in the vernacular.
Jabines said the provisions of the contract usually contain the tasks that a minor should do to make up for the crime.
This ranges from attending social and spiritual enhancement trainings to attending seminars as well as performing community service.
The barangay social worker and staff are then tasked to monitor the progress of children.
"Us, the social workers are the ones focused on the monitoring of children since our progress reports become the basis of the judge to terminate the case.
That is why our monitoring on the child is daily and they are also made to report to the barangay once a month," Jabines said.
When they report to the barangay, they are asked to assist in barangay events or activities while some are also given clerical or janitorial work.
She also recalled that at to some extent, she advised children to keep diaries of the minute details of their daily activities.
It then became apparent that those who comply with such task were the ones who had their cases in court terminated, as Jabines recalled that one of her clients who was charged last year when he was 16 years old has now become a changed person.
She said the 16-year-old boy has been a recidivist since he was 11 after he was arrested for numerous thefts.
The boy was then charged in court after he was arrested for sniffing solvent.
But it was his good behavior, compliance to the task and his commitment to doing small steps for his change that has led to the dismissal of the case against him.
"That boy really performed well so we recommended for the termination of his case.
Now he is attending Sunday school through the scholarship provided by the government.
Although some would refuse because they find it tedious, I believe it could help the child as well as the barangay social workers in monitoring as it is a good sign that the minor is compliant even to that task," Jabines said.
But Prosecutor Gaye Ca\xf1ete, who is assigned at Regional Trial Court  Branch 33, said there are still cases wherein a minor was sentenced recalling that a minor was meted a 20-year imprisonment for non-compliance of the contract.
"There was one case where the child was given three chances but he did not comply so he was sentenced instead.
It was such a waste of opportunity not to only to have the case dismissed but for him to change," Ca\xf1ete said.
Canete was quick to add that those who comply with the program turn out to be more successful, as they pick out the lessons from the mistakes they have committed.
She remembers one minor, who after earning a positive assessment from the barangay social workers and having the case dismissed, emerged as a youth leader in the community.
She added that minors should also respect the effort that the barangay social workers have exerted since after all, they play a big role in helping the child avoid meting jail time or penalty.
Jabines said that once they process for the termination of the case before the court and when the court judge orders for the dismissal of the case, the CSSDO implements additional aftercare programs where families of the minors may be given livelihood assistance to alleviate one of the primary reasons why minors are involved in crimes which is poverty.
In the end, however, it's all a matter of choice.
They may have been found to be acting with discernment when they committed an offense, but they may also be found to be acting with discernment in doing the right thing which is to change for the better.
Steiner Waldorf preschool to open in Cebu, Steiner Waldorf preschool to open in Cebu

A PRESCHOOL that offers Waldorf education is set to open in Cebu City for the new school year.
St.
Michael2019s Play Garden, the only Steiner Waldorf preschool in Cebu, will begin classes on Monday, June 15, 2015.
Waldorf education is an internationally-used pedagogy based on the philosophy of the Austrian scientist Rudolf Steiner.
 It aims to educate the growing child2019s 201chead, hands, heart, and spirit201d via truly age-appropriate practices.

Teachers in Waldorf schools believe that education should be fun, stress-free, and geared towards holistic and not just academic development of a child.
Despite the absence of reading and writing in Waldorf preschool, numerous studies have proven how Waldorf education builds a stronger long-term intellectual foundation.
St.
Michael2019s Play Garden offers Kindergarten; Parent-Toddler Group; After-School Care; After-School Crafts, Arts, Music, and Practical Arts ; Grade School Support; Homeschool Parent Program; and training workshops for parents, teachers, and yayas .

St.
Michael2019s Play Garden is located on Coast Pacific St., Old Banilad Road, Kasambagan, Cebu City.

For inquiries, e-mail: stmichaelsplaygarden@gmail.com or call 266-5849 or 0932-886-3041.

What Oro residents have to say on 2018Independence Day2019 , What Oro residents have to say on 2018Independence Day2019 TODAY, the country commemorates the 117th year of Independence Day from the Spanish bondage.
Various commemoration activities are being held in the country spearheaded by local government units.
Sun.Star Cagayan de Oro sought some thoughts from the residents here on how they perceive or think of the Philippine Independence Day.
  
For Lowell Joyce Sangcopan of Misamis Oriental General Comprehensive High School , Independence Day means flags displayed in establishments and houses to signify the acquisition of the country2019s independence and added saying, 201cIt2019s all about spending the day thinking and contemplating on the sacrifices made by our heroes and by the Filipinos long ago just so we can be free today.201d
Flor Jaranilla, a housewife and mother of 3, said 201cIndependence Day is a way of celebrating the freedom that we are experiencing today at the expense of those men and women who chose to fight in the midst of war with the vision of making the Philippines what it is today.201d
Gloria Maniego, a government employee, said what she likes best is the patriotic feeling the holiday brings with it.
201cSomehow, no matter how much chaos and disagreement the country is obviously in right now, Independence Day I think, reminds not only me but also everyone that we are under one flag and that we should fight for what is right for our country.201d
To Roselyn Allora, a vendor at De Lara Park, Independence Day is very much commercialized today.
201cI don2019t believe that most Filipinos really understand what is being celebrated.201d
Meanwhile, Ryan Catedral, a businessman, raised the question that even if the country is now independent from other country2019s oppression, 201care we still free from our own problems?201d For Ryan, the real meaning of freedom is being free from these injustices and corruption that the country is now facing.
Vincent Roy Sadicon, of the Araling Panlipunan department of MOGCHS, has plans on activities and projects for his students on Independence Day especially focusing on the local heroes of Misamis Oriental.
201cI have a mixed feeling about Independence Day.
I want to give less emphasis on the celebration and more on spreading the spirit of Filipino Independence all year round.
Because when we talk about Independence Day, it2019s always about what happened in the national level and with that I also want to give awareness on the local level.201d     
Allyn Pe?alosa, MisOr information officer, said that the country is 201ctechnically-free
because speaking from the point of view of women here, we have the freedom to vote and to do whatever we want.
Every time we use this freedom, we should always think that we are responsible with it.
We should care of the gift of freedom.201d
Skeptics
201cWe are still searching for freedom.
We are not totally free from the colonizers and it is still a problem,201d Grace Montenegro, a college student, said.
Rev.
Fr.
Eldes Escobel, of Iglesia Filipina Independiente  Archdiocese of Dinagat, is skeptic on the freedom saying 201cEach of us should look for the true freedom, because true freedom is not just seen on the physical experiences.
The true and mature freedom can be seen in the heart of the people who live in happiness.
But for me, we cannot experience true freedom because we are still slaves in this decayed system of government.
We are slaves politically, economically and even socially.
The government and the people should see and find solutions to stand in our sad state because at the moment 90 percent of the people are slaves.201d
Joseph, a member of the Philippine National Police , said 201cThe country has never been independent because we are still victims of our corrupt politicians.
We are still victims of the other countries like America and China.
We never experience true freedom and independence.2019  
Path to greatness, Path to greatnessRuji Peter S.
Abat, AT THE age of 11, Dabawenya junior golfer Alessandra Nagayo is already carving a path to greatness as she is set to represent the Philippines in the upcoming US Golf World Championship to be held in Pinehurst, North Carolina on July 29 to August 2.
Nagayo earned the opportunity to represent the country after she topped the 11-year-old division in the US Kids Golf World Championship International Qualifiers held recently at the Orchard Golf and Country Club in Cavite.
"I felt happy and proud nung nanalo ako sa qualifying tournament.
Ang ginawa ko lang was I stayed focus and wala akong inisip kung di ang game ko.
Positive lang din ang mindset ko nun and nakatulong din siya sa akin " Nagayo said.
But Nagayo admitted that she is still a work in progress under the wings of coaches Sonny Villaver and Toch Altea.
Hence, she has set her preparations in high gear since she expects the world championships to be the toughest challenge in her young golf career yet.
She practices six days a week from Monday to Saturday at the Apo Gold and Country Club.
"I believe that my drives are already good but I need to work on my short game so that I will increase my chances of winning," Nagayo said.
Nagayo has learned the ropes of golf when she was seven and shortly she started joining local junior teefests after learning the fundamentals of the game.
She also participated in inter-school tournaments in Australia.
At an early age, she is expectedly looking for material accomplishments like having major sponsors and winning lots of prizes.
Yet, in her tender years, she has already have a passionate pursuit to become the best in the world and this passion has been fueled by her parents Danny and Councilor Rachel Zozobrado-Nagayo who has given her full support all along.
Nagayo shared that she was taught by her parents to have a hollistic approach in improving her game saying that she has to be mentally, physically and spiritually strong to become the best.
Having a registered nurse and a trainer as a father, she said she has to follow a diet plan which means she has to deprive herself of the usual comfort food for children, which are mostly comprised of junk food.
But she was quick to add, "Things like the diet will not be a hindrance for me to become the best."
It has been a force of habit for her and her little brother Daniel to wake up at 5 a.m.
and head to the golf course for some practice rounds daily while also keeping herself active in the afternoon with either practicing at Golf View Driving Range or doing sparring sessions in boxing.
She has also kept her academics in check as a grade six student of Brainworks School Inc.
saying she is doing well with her studies while spiritually, she said she always goes to mass with her family on Sundays.
"My parents are doing their best to support me and I am very thankful for them.
That is why I also need to do my best to win the world championships," Nagayo said.
She also urged other kids of her age to be excellent in whatever they do, stay humble in defeat and make every loss a learning opportunity.
Ayala Museum introduces 3D AR experience, Ayala Museum introduces 3D AR experienceRobert Harland, AS A senior citizen, I am constantly amazed at how new technology is affecting just about every aspect of our lives.
Many of us old 'uns are often baffled by it all, though it was amusing the other day to find that three young Apple employees were unable to tell me how to reload my iPod as they simply didn't know!
On Thursday, I was invited to the Ayala Museum in Makati for the media launch of the latest technological breakthrough designed to make a museum experience more interesting, more exciting and more alive.
The museum has joined forces with the Harish and Johnsen Group to launch what is called 3D Augmented Reality .
It really does add what local artistic director Rene Hinojales would call the "Wow" factor.

The Ayala Museum is the first in Asia to offer the AR feature.
This is how it works.

When you tour the museum's famous Dioramas, simply don your headphones and hold your smart phone or iPad in front of the AR-ready Dioramas and "Wow," these historic scenes will be brought to life by exciting animation, realistic sound effects and voice narrations.
If you're using your own smart phone, you'll need to download the app, but no need as you can rent special AR units from the museum for a modest P95.
"An iconic part of childhood for many a Filipino thanks to school tours and family visits to the museum, the Dioramas were envisioned to be a compelling way to tell the rich history of our country,201d says Mariles Gustilo, senior director for Arts and Culture of the Ayala Foundation.
"Now, with the new AR feature, we're giving the Dioramas a whole new experience."
The new AR feature was conceptualized, designed and developed by Harish and Johnsen and supported by Globe, Avida Land and the Power Mac Center.
Shirah Ragos Segarra, vice president of the Haresh Johnsen Group, says, "We are not just revolutionizing the experience, but are actually witnessing evolution unwrap itself right before our very eyes, in the palm of our hands - literally."
The 3D AR feature was publicly launched yesterday during the 117th anniversary of Philippine independence.

During the day, Globe postpaid subscribers were treated to free museum admission and able to download a free version of the AR app while pre-paid user were afforded generous discounts on entrance fees.
The Ayala Museum is an amazing place - with the introduction of the dynamic 3D AR feature, the best just got better.
Ayala Museum introduces 3D AR experience, Ayala Museum introduces 3D AR experienceRobert Harland, As a senior citizen, I am constantly amazed at how new technology is affecting just about every aspect of our lives.
Many of us old 'uns are often baffled by it all, though it was amusing the other day to find that three young Apple employees were unable to tell me how to reload my iPod as they simply didn't know!
On Thursday, I was invited to the Ayala Museum in Makati for the media launch of the latest technological breakthrough designed to make a museum experience more interesting, more exciting and more alive.
The museum has joined forces with the Harish and Johnsen Group to launch what is called 3D Augmented Reality .
It really does add what local artistic director Rene Hinojales would call the "Wow" factor.

The Ayala Museum is the first in Asia to offer the AR feature.
This is how it works.

When you tour the museum's famous Dioramas, simply don your headphones and hold your smart phone or iPad in front of the AR-ready Dioramas and "Wow," these historic scenes will be brought to life by exciting animation, realistic sound effects and voice narrations.
If you're using your own smart phone, you'll need to download the app, but no need as you can rent special AR units from the museum for a modest P95.
"An iconic part of childhood for many a Filipino thanks to school tours and family visits to the museum, the Dioramas were envisioned to be a compelling way to tell the rich history of our country,201d says Mariles Gustilo, senior director for Arts and Culture of the Ayala Foundation.
"Now, with the new AR feature, we're giving the Dioramas a whole new experience."
The new AR feature was conceptualized, designed and developed by Harish and Johnsen and supported by Globe, Avida Land and the Power Mac Center.
Shirah Ragos Segarra, vice president of the Haresh Johnsen Group, says, "We are not just revolutionizing the experience, but are actually witnessing evolution unwrap itself right before our very eyes, in the palm of our hands - literally."
The 3D AR feature was publicly launched yesterday during the 117th anniversary of Philippine independence.

During the day, Globe postpaid subscribers were treated to free museum admission and able to download a free version of the AR app while pre-paid user were afforded generous discounts on entrance fees.
The Ayala Museum is an amazing place - with the introduction of the dynamic 3D AR feature, the best just got better.*
The student is now a teacher, The student is now a teacherON APRIL 27, Evelyn Caballero, 39, a resident of Barangay Balulang here in the city, along with her husband and daughters marched on stage during the graduation ceremony of the Philippine Institute of Skills and Development .
PISAD is the partner of the Department of Social Welfare and Development in Northern Mindanao  in training Pantawid Pamilya beneficiaries under the Sustainable Livelihood Program  technical-vocational skills training.
Evelyn finished the Beauty Care Course of PISAD and passed the NC II accreditation by the Technical Education and Skills Development Authority .
After more than a month, Evelyn is now teaching the clients of Haven for Women of DSWD Northern Mindanao.
Happy to share
Happiness to see others developed their skills in beauty care matters most to Evelyn.
201cGusto ko ma-improve ang skills nila ug gusto ko nga daghan ang matabangan ,201d she said.
Evelyn will be teaching the clients of DSWD on manicure, pedicure, makeup, foot massage and spa, among others every Tuesday and Wednesday until July 2015.
Haven for Women Center Head Rosanel Pague disclosed that DSWD Northern Mindanao utilizes Evelyn2019s expertise because she has been into training with DSWD Northern Mindanao clients for several years.
Evelyn has a beauty and hair salon in Balulang then.
But, in December 2011, Tropical Storm Sendong ravaged all her beauty tools.
She was left with nothing.
Persevere to finish tech-voc course
After more than three years Sendong hit this city and in Iligan, Evelyn2019s prayer for beauty care kit has been answered.
Pisad gave beauty care kits to 30 Pantawid Pamilya graduates under the SLP skills training program in coordination with Tesda.
Evelyn, president of the class, said her family has a brighter future because of DSWD Northern Mindanao.
Before, Evelyn disclosed that she has been into training by private institutions in beauty care, but they are not accredited by Tesda.
201cLahi ra jud sa SLP kay Tesda accredited man gud.
Dili lang mi basta graduate, tinud-anay jud nga graduate ,201d she said.
Under the SLP skills training program, Pantawid Pamilya beneficiaries are helped to become productive and gainfully employed through skills training, job search assistance, and provision of cash allowance for transport and food.
Majority of the beneficiaries are children and dependents of recipient families of the DSWD Cash Conditional Transfer  also known as the Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program.
Tesda, through its 126 administered training institutions, is responsible for the skills training and development component of the project.
The six-month training includes skills assessment and certification and entrepreneurship development activities.
The skills training program has two components: training for wage employment and training for self-employment.
Beauty salon re-opens
Evelyn wants to reopen her beauty salon in Barangay Balulang.
She does not want to go abroad for employment because she wants to focus on guiding her daughters who are still attending school.
Evelyn2019s elder daughter Christine Mae is taking up social work course, Flynda Jane Leizl is a Grade 10 of Balulang National High School, and Christie Liza, a Grade 4 of Balulang Elementary School here.
With the reopening of her parlor, Evelyn claims that, 201cnakatawid na jud ko.201d .
Before, she said, her family could hardly support the education of their children.
Thankful to PNoy and DSWD
With the national government2019s intervention through DSWD2019s conditional cash transfer  program to improve the plight and condition of the poor families and empower them through skills training, Evelyn thanked the program.
201cI thank President  Aquino and DSWD for giving us the chance to live out of poverty,201d she said in vernacular.
201cIt really helped me and millions of Filipinos who, before, don2019t have the opportunity to improve their quality of life.
But, now, we are all enjoying the interventions,201d Evelyn said.
Evelyn said she will never cease dreaming of an abundant life, adding she is determined to live out of poverty through education.
201cIt is only in education that I can reach all my dreams for myself, to my husband, and to my children,201d said she.
The Pantawid Pamilya program is the national government2019s social development program that provides conditional cash grants to poor families with children aged 18-years-old and below.
A household could receive a maximum of P1,400 a month for their health, nutrition and education provided that they comply with conditions of the Program.
These conditions include availing of regular preventive health check-ups and vaccines, maintaining at least 85 percent school attendance, and regularly attending family development sessions.
To date, Northern Mindanao has 259,797 active beneficiaries of Pantawid Pamilya.
Greening a retail store, Greening a retail storeChit Juan, THERE are so many buzzwords lately some of which are: eco-friendly, going green and reduce, reuse , recycle, But what can one do to really have an eco-friendly retail store? 
Think long term profit, not short-term gains
"We knew inverter aircons are more expensive but over time, we gain the savings back because we save as much as 50% in electricity expenses," said Reena Francisco, designer and store set up in-charge for the Echostore chain of eco-friendly stores.
Reena chose inverter aircons for their newest store.
"We also used LED lights," she continued.
They are more expensive at the start but eventually they will pay off in length of service and in decreased electrical consumption, she said.
"I used to replace halogen lights almost every month," she said.
"I have changed all our lights now to LED," the practical designer said.
Think company-wide, not a solo journey
Being eco-friendly means engaging all your staff and employees and not just keeping the objectives to yourself or your partners.
The whole company must be aware of the store2019s or company's philosophy.

"We use old glossy magazines for our paper bags," Chit Juan, Echostore co-founder.
"It was a happy coincidence that we forgot to think about what  bags to use when we started the store.
So Reena started to fold old magazines into paper bags of various sizes," she said.
Even the Echostore licensees get a lesson in making paper bags out of magazines.
Think organic
"We used to go to the weekend markets before we opened Echostore" said Jeannie Javelosa, the third of Echostore's triumvirate.
"Then we asked Chit to start planting our own organic vegetables in the Echofarms," she said.

Now the Echostore is able to use their own organic farm-grown vegetables in their Echocafe.

"Everything we do is centered on organically-grown or organically-produced," Jeannie pointed out.
"For our licensees, we do check their sources for organic vegetables and other fresh produce which come from nearby sources rather than all the way from Manila, in true eco-friendly fashion," Chit said.
From the physical store set-up to what is sold in the store, eco-friendly practices demand that no toxic chemicals are used in any of the products.
"No harmful chemicals is what we say because some wisecrack might say water is also a chemical, and we ,of course, use water, Reena said.
She handled the manufacture of their eco-friendly body products and home cleaning solutions.
Besides being a social enterprise that sells many products from artisans and small producers around the country, Echostore has given meaning to its very name which stands for Environment, Community, Hope and Organization, making consumers get the "aha" moment of why it is Echostore and not Eco-store.

It is more than eco-friendly.
It engages communities, non-profits and recently even aid agencies and government bodies who need market access for their beneficiaries' products.
Further, Echostore has expanded its reach by opening licensed stores in Centris, Quezon City, Davao City, and Cebu City.
Replace halogen lights almost every month," she said.
Sunday Essay: Independent?, Sunday Essay: Independent?WE, once again, celebrated the Philippine Independence Day as our country won our freedom against the colonizers we.
But could we say that our state is truly independent?
Our separation from the Spaniards on the 12th day of June 1898 and freedom from the American colonizers on the 4th day of July 1946 did not make any difference because we are talking about the essence of "independence." 
What does it really mean to be an independent country?
To be an independent country, dictionary-wise, means  to think and act for oneself;  to be free from control by other countries; and/or  does not owe any allegiance in any way.
Unfortunately, the Philippines, did not meet all of these requirements in any of the mentioned definitions, or at least one of them.
We are not a colonized country in today's time, but there are several situations to justify why our country is truly not free militarily, economically, and culturally.
Our country still has the incapability to stand up against China in the territorial claims on Spratly Islands and Scarborough Shoal.
Our nation had to call up for assistance from United States of America  in dealing with the territorial dispute.
Thus, with the help of Visiting Forces Agreement, the US will send their military troops in the Philippines to help defend the territories.
The economy of the Philippines is dependent on annual remittance rates of Overseas Filipino Workers  and foreign investors.
The trade and investment of the country has always been connected with United States and other countries.
If there will be another global financial crisis, the companies have massive layoff of workers including the locals and/or OFWs which will lead to higher unemployment rate.
Our nation has also have not outgrown the colonial mentality that the Westerners has instilled in us which makes us still dependent.
Some of our countrymen would always think that buying foreign or branded things are always better than the local products.
Others would also take pride in learning the English language but would never appreciate our mother language.
The challenge for the Philippines is to aim high and work hard towards a better nation, and appreciate our own nationality as a Filipino for us to be called as a truly independent country instead of jumping into conclusion that we cannot do anything to develop our motherland.
Happy 2018Independence2019 Day, Philippines!
Pamana's flight to freedom, Pamana's flight to freedom
Pamana lands on the ground of Mt.
Hamiguitan Range Wildlife Sanctuary stage.

Ivy C.
Tejano, MOUNT HAMIGUITAN, Davao Oriental -- The flight to freedom of the Philippine Eagle Pamana was trembling at first, as she hit a tent along her path, apparently confused over the 200 people watching her regain freedom on June 12 at sitio Tomalite in barangay La Union in San Isidro town.

Pamana instead landed at the Mount Hamiguitan Range Wildlife Sanctuary stage about 100 meters away from the kennel cage where she took off and examined her surroundings for almost 20 minutes while the crowd without a sound stood by and watched her.
The crowd cheered when the eagle flew off, only to rest on a nearby tree for about 10 minutes.
Pamana finally took off to the woods about 8:35 a.m.
Friday, as the nation marked the 117th year of independence.
The 28,000 hectare forest, a Unesco World Heritage site, will be now Pamana's home.
Pamana was rescued from the woods of Gabunan Range in Iligan City.
She arrived at the Philippine Eagle Center  in April 2012.
According to the Philippine Eagle Foundation  curator Anna Mae Sumaya, Pamana was found perched on a tree near a creek, weak and docile, as it sustained gunshot wounds in her wings and breast.
Sumaya said Pamana was less than a year old when she arrived at the center in Malagos, Calinan District, Davao City.
She added that her wings and tail feathers are still pointed and not yet molted while the scales on its legs are still soft and yellowish.
"Looking at the bird now at approximately three years old, it has grown to its full height and glory, with only few of its pointed feather tips and occasional developmental behavior giving away its young age.
Pamana is ready for release," Sumaya said, adding that it took three years of treatment for Pamana to fully recover.
PEF executive director Dennis Salvador said Pamana's release also symbolize how Filipinos value their freedom, the same way they value the country2019s national bird 2014 the Philippine Eagle 2014 whose population is threatened by extinction.
Jayson Ibanez, director for research and conservation of the PEF, said Pamana was released into the woods by a soft-release method.
He added that her release ends the life of captivity and human dependence and marks the survival and eventual breeding of the Philippine Eagle, reducing the chances of its extinction.
The soft-release or hacking method is a procedure that involves caging a bird at the release site for at least two weeks prior to setting it free, Ibanez said, adding that this adjusts or acclimatizes the eagle to local conditions.
After release, supplemental food will be offered just in case she finds it hard to hunt.
Pamana, who bears the bloodline of the eagles in the Lanao del Norte region, which is 245 kilometer northwest of Hamiguitan, has a GPS satellite tag to allow remote monitoring and radio transmitter so biologist can track its location in real time.
"One of the objectives of the release is to have more breeds.
If Pamana would successfully mate and breed with an individual from Mount Hamiguitan, we are intentionally crossing bloodline, and genetics predicted.
This is good for its population," Ibanez said, adding that they monitored a pair of eagles in Mati City that once a year breeds.
The Mount Hamiguitan, a natural eagle habitat, was claimed as the country2019s sixth World Heritage site last June 23, 2014.
Pamana, which literally means heritage, was named after the place was strictly protected and declared as world heritage.

"We choose to release Pamana in this area because of the commitment of the provincial government as well as the San Isidro local government unit  to protect the heritage site.
The release was aimed at improving the genetic flow of the eagles here and underscored the significance of the mountain range," Salvador said.
The PEF has been trying to breed eagles in captivity to increase its population and has successfully hatched 25 eaglets since 1992.
There are 36 Philippine Eagles under the custody of the PEC to protect them.
The population of the eagles has been placed at less than 500 pairs, including those that were sighted in the remaining forest.
Ibanez said releasing predators like the Philippine Eagle to areas where they are historically found also improves the ecological health of the ecosystem.
He added that as the top carnivore in the Philippine tropical forest, they can regulate the numbers of the animals they eat thus preventing them from depleting their food sources.
Through its conservation program, the PEF hopes to augment the species dwindling population by releasing the captive bred eagles back to their natural habitat.
Widely recognized for its accomplishments in the conservation of the eagle, the foundation continues to grow with its science-based programs and people-oriented strategies.
Roberto Alabado III, director of the Department of Tourism  Davao Region, meanwhile, said now that Pamana is part of the Hamiguitan, the tourism in coordination with local government units2019 and other concerned agencies shall strengthen its efforts to turn Davao Region into an ecotourism destination.
"I could see Hamiguitan as tourism site.
And as an eco-tourism, the area wouldn2019t be open to mass tourism.
We first have to protect the environment so that our tourists would enjoy it and for the next generations to come," Alabado said.
Pamana's release was made possible thru funding from Boysen Philippines, Shell Philippines, Disney Worldwide Conservation Fund, and Kim and Feli Atienza, supported by Davao Oriental province2019s local government and its towns San Isidro, Mati City and Governor Generoso, among the other stakeholders.
Globe senior Vice President for the Enterprise Group Nikko p Acosta, meanwhile, confirmed that this year, Globe Business would continue its support to PEF through an additional P500,000 grant in the areas of work to ensure that more Philippines Eagles like Pamana can be cared for and eventually set free in the wild.
The release was covered by a memorandum of agreement  with the Biodiversity Management Bureau of the Department of Environment and Natural Resources  and a Gratuitous Permit issued by the DENR in Davao Region.
Conquering Mt.
Apo, Conquering Mt.
Apo
Alvin Redulosa, a 24-year-old with Down Syndrome, poses with the team at the campsite near the peak of Mt.
Apo.
Ruji Peter S.
Abat, ALVIN REDULOSA, 24-year-old with Down syndrome, is a living testament that his condition is not a hindrance for him to achieve something as he is the first down syndrome patient to be documented to have successfully scaled the country's highest peak in Mt.
Apo.
Alvin successfully trekked Mt.
Apo on May 28 to 30 and he was accompanied by the Down Syndrome Association of the Philippines, Inc.
, a medical team and no less than former Davao City mayor Sara Duterte-Carpio.
DSAPI-Davao consultant Lanie Vergara, in an interview with Sun.Star Davao, said the association suggested the climb to Alvin and he willingly accepted the challenge.
Prior to the climb, lanie said his husband Allan trained Alvin for his preparation.
He had a tune-up climb at Puting Bato on the Island Garden City of Samal in September last year.
Three months before his climb, Alvin underwent endurance training three times a week.
"Wala gayud angal si Alvin kay abtik na nuon kaayo siya mubangon pa ingnan namo nga magtraining na.
Pero siyempre wala gyud namo gisobrahan ang training.
Kung muingon si Alvin nga gikapoy na siya, magpahulay dayon mi ," Allan said.
Lanie said Alvin was fully determined in scaling Mt.
Apo as he was able to complete the trek within three days, a day earlier than the regular four-day "fun climb."
"When we consider down syndrome, kani sila dali lang kapoyon, baba ilang endurance, dili kabalo mudala sa ilang lawas ug masakiton.
Pero as far as Alvin is concerned, napakita gyud niya na kung kaya nato, kaya pud niya ," Lanie said.
Alvin had surprisingly displayed great endurance and determination during the climb as Lanie said, "We were already exhausted and we wanted to rest but when we saw Alvin trying his best to continue trekking, we were also motivated to push ourselves.
We didn't expect that he would display such endurance so basically, he was an inspiration to us."
During the three-day climb, they experienced heavy downpour and staggering heat but this did not hinder Alvin from continuing his trek.

They started trekking at around 8 a.m.
and reached the first campsite in Maag at around 2 p.m.
They stayed there for the night until they made their way to the peak the following day.
Alvin then reached the peak on May 29 and they made their way down the following day.
Allan said the way down was the most difficult part due to the steepness of the trail.
But Alvin had done a good job making his way down saying, 201cLawyer Sara and the others had stumbled a few times but Alvin didn2019t.
So we just laughed it out and continued to go down.
I then advised Alvin what to do and he complied that is why he survived.201d
When asked about his experience during the climb, Alvin said he did not feel exhausted in anyway while he also said that he was able to conquer the trail with ease.
He added that he was extremely happy upon reaching the peak.
Lanie, meanwhile, is thankful for the support of the R.O.X., The North Face, Block Diamond and the Antonio O.
Floirendo Foundation.
He also thanked Alvin2019s mother Pacita for allowing DSAPI-Davao to take her child to Mt.
Apo.
After scaling the highest peak in the country, Alvin is now set to embark on another challenge.
It will then be a 201chighlands to islands201d experience for Alvin as he is set to accomplish a cross-channel swimming from Davao City to the Island Garden City of Samal.
Lanie said that he will still have to prepare but they are already confident that Alvin could also accomplish the feat.
201cDespite having Down syndrome, Alvin showed that he can do strenuous activities contrary to the claims that they are physically weak.
We hope to inspire parents and we hope that they could turn down the doubts on what people with Down syndrome could do since we should rather focus on the ability not the disability,201d Lanie added.
Youth-led peace effort in Sulu\xa0a beacon of hope, Youth-led peace effort in Sulu\xa0a beacon of hopeRyan D.
Rosauro, Correspondent, ADVERSITY is said to beget adversity.
But in conflict-torn Sulu, hope shines from a youth-led peacebuilding initiative that has transformed an almost deserted village in Parang town into a vibrant community of some 300 families.
And with the Bangsamoro transition in the horizon, the experience of building and sustaining a 201cpeace-centered community201d in Parang2019s Barangay Silangkan provides vital lessons on how to organize the work of maintaining law and order in the future autonomous region2019s culturally diverse communities.
201cThe Silangkan experience is a story of community folks taking care of and nurturing the peace,201d said Rosemain Abduraji of the nongovernment group\xa0Tumikang Sama-Sama\xa0.
201cWhile we practically need the police for law enforcement, there is no pillar stronger than the people taking responsibility for keeping the peace in their community,201d she said.
The initiative of Silangkan folks to keep the peace is borne out of a recent history of strife that tore apart the community2019s social fabric.
In 2001, government security forces bombed the coastal village in the process of pursuing Moro National Liberation Front  leader Nur Misuari who had led a siege in Sulu and Zamboanga City after falling out of the political grace with President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo.
The massive military assault on Silangkan left a deep sense of insecurity among the villagers.
Long after the hunt for Misuari ended, many villagers chose not to return except to tend to their farms during the day.
Soon, the village became a halfway route for Abu Sayyaf bandits who were escaping toward island hideaways or getting into the Sulu mainland, using the village2019s wharf.
Abu Sayyaf bandits also choose the village to stage ballistic tests for newly bought firearms.
This situation has driven most households to arm themselves for protection.
Just when Silangkan folks have almost given up on their situation, fate intervened.
One weekend in 2012, the Jolo-based TSS staff went on a 45-minute drive to Silangkan to enjoy its pristine white sand beach.
There, they had a chance encounter with Ab2019d Tazir, a former MNLF commander and among the few residents who remained in the village.
What was supposed to be a weekend getaway turned out to be a deep and engaging conversation about an aging man2019s dream for his family.
201cCommander Tazir told us how much he wanted his children and grandchildren to acquire education so that they will have a bright future ahead of them,201d related Khamar Alama.
201cWe didn2019t expect to have a very emotionally touching exchange with him,201d Alama added.
When they got back to Jolo, Alama and TSS colleagues, who are trained in conflict mediation, began planning how to help Tazir fulfill his simple but powerful dream.
201cWe started with a community dialogue.
We have people express what they wanted to see happen in their community and how they can help achieve these goals,201d said Abduraji.
201cMainly, the Silangkan villagers don2019t want a repeat of the 2001 experience when they were bombed by the military.
They also resolved to address a host of family feuds which result in the displacement of involved parties, hence lessen their opportunities for earning income, thereby perpetuating poverty,201d Abduraji recalled.\xa0
After a series of community-wide discussions, Silangkan villagers agreed on a set of seemingly simple rules that must be observed to keep the peace.
One, the village folks must monitor strangers who enter their community to guard against the intrusion of bandits.
Two, there should be no public display of firearms to prevent provocation.
Three, the households are organized into clusters of 10 and an elder is assigned as as a sort of 201coverseer.201d Problems with one another should first be referred to the elder-in-charge.
It is elevated to the higher leadership layers if issues are unresolved.
The last resort in conflict settlement is going to the authorities, whether the barangay officials or local police, although 201cmost of the problems are solved at the neighborhood level,201d noted Alama.
201cThese three basic rules are contained in a community covenant that the households signed,201d Alama said.
Abduraji said the participation and involvement of elders are the bedrock of the peace-centered community approach that they developed for Silangkan.
201cThey are very effective leaders because they are the ones seen and heard by the people everyday,201d she said.
As community peace began to take root in Silangkan, the displaced families who fled a decade ago began to stream back.
Improved security also made the village a destination of basic service delivery of government agencies like medical and dental missions.

The village2019s elementary and high schools were repaired.
The community2019s peace infrastructure is maintained and kept alive every week.

After every congregational prayer, people hold a dialogue presided by the elders whereby issues and problems are openly discussed and resolved, said Alama.
201cThis makes the bond among villagers stronger,201d he added.
Three years on, Silangkan folks are able to look forward to encouraging developments, like tapping the village2019s eco-tourism potentials.
Silangkan also hosts schoolchildren from at least three neighboring villages torn by the presence of the Abu Sayyaf which have no schools.
201cFor its role in maintaining access to education, Silangkan is becoming a lighthouse for other areas,201d Alama said.
Experiences like that of Silangkan are rich models for lessons on community policing 201cthat hopefully can be mainstreamed and become the norm,201d according to Kathline Tolosa of the Security Reform Initiative .
The future Bangsamoro government is envisioned to adopt community policing as a way of maintaining law and order in the communities under its administrative jurisdiction.
Pieter Cronje, consultant to the Bangsamoro Community Policing Project of the British Council, said that such approach fits post-conflict situations like in the Bangsamoro region where law enforcement has been an extension of military work.
201cIn the 21st\xa0century, you cannot conduct policing in a military manner,201d Cronje said.
The concept of community policing was developed more fully by the United Kingdom after the so-called 201cRiots201d that rocked south London in 1981.
It sought to address racial discrimination in the conduct of law enforcement work.
Tolosa said that they are hopeful the emerging approach for community policing in the future Bangsamoro will be a mix of international and local experiences.
To ensure a high degree of success, the policing approach for the Bangsamoro should be 201calong the grain of local practices and culture,201d said Nicholas Thomas, British Council country director for the Philippines.
Back in Sulu, Alama and Abduraji, who are in their early 30s, hope 201cthat sooner, law and order issues in our province are resolved by Sulu folks who know more about solutions than anyone else.201d
For the longstanding and seemingly intractable problem of community conflicts in Sulu, it bodes well for the entire Bangsamoro that the 201cinnocence and fresh perspective of youth,201d if harnessed, can make a difference.\xa0
Life after a kidney transplant, Life after a kidney transplantIvy C.
Tejano, "YOU only get as much as you put into.
So don't waste time dwelling on how imperfect life can be.
Just keep moving."
This is how Ivy Meliton, a kidney disease survivor, deals with life after she underwent a kidney transplant 13 years ago.
It was in 2010 and Meliton was in second year high school when she had complications, particularly in urinating.
"Madalas nahihilo ako.
Hirap huminga.
Nagiging masakitin, madalas nilalagnat tsaka mahina sa gawain," she said.
After several laboratory tests, Meliton was diagnosed with kidney failure, wastes build-up and fluids inside the body.
Kidney specialist Dr.
Frankline Guillano, in an interview, said what Meliton had been through was a glomerulonephritis.
Glomerulonephritis is a group of diseases that injures the part of the kidney that filters blood, the so-called glomeruli.
Its chronic form may develop silently  over several years.
It often leads to complete kidney failure.
Among the symptoms of kidney failure are lack of appetite, nausea and vomiting, tiredness and difficulty in sleeping.
"Mahilig kasi ako sa maalat na pagkain nuon hanggang sa nagkasakit na ako.
Nung nagkasakit, it was then I realized how imbalance my lifestyle was," she said.
"I was able to have a kidney transplant when I was 15, through the help of my sister, who was my donor," Meliton added.
After Meliton had a kidney transplant, she managed to change her lifestyle.
She said she is now more on healthy diet.
"When you're told to cut back on sodium and potassium, do it.
It's for your own good.
Iwas lang sakit," Meliton said.
Meliton was born on August 10, 1985 in Esperanza town, Sultan Kudarat, and studied at Isulan National High School.
She was in Davao City last Monday with Dr.
Guillano and other two survivors in celebration of National Kidney Month.
Guillano advised those with diabetes and hypertension to have annual urine tests to check the health of their kidneys.
Kidney ailments do not have symptoms until it reach stage four or five where dialysis or kidney transplant is required.
Guillano said kidney transplant can now be performed locally with 98 percent success rate.
He also said lifestyle check and medical assessment are important to ensure one's health.
Meliton is now a happy plain housewife and a mother of two kids.
She said she never regret anything from her past, instead, she learned from it.
Celebrating fathers, Celebrating fathersPamela Jay F.
Orias, 201cMY FATHER was about to take a step which would change his life as he readied to set foot on the ship that promised him luxurious abundance, but it was also at that time he learned he was about to become a father,201d shared Trixia Belga, a 20-year-old resident of Naawan as she recalled that turning point of his father2019s life.
Trixia adores her father Rolando so much for his commitment and principles in life and salutes him for choosing the life he shares with them now.
"Without any second thought, he packed his bags and went home to where his heart belongs.
He decided to be a hands-on father and embraced the pros and cons that came with it.
He could have worked and given his family a luxurious life, but he decided to live simply and enjoy the little things that mattered most," she said.

Instead of enjoying a luxurious life, Trixia2019s father preferred to sing them lullabies, change diapers and prepare milk.
"I can say that my father2019s self-esteem was boosted by the happiness in raising and seeing his children grow without missing important milestones," she said.
When her father taught her how to drive a motorcycle, it meant to her to be independent.
201cHe wanted to make sure that I can do things by myself when the time comes that he won't be able to take me to places anymore.201d
Bernie Caibigan Jamaca, a resident in Cagayan de Oro, admires and cherishes his father, Agustin Sr., for raising 11 children.
He could not imagine how his father raised and sent them all to school.
"I remember him as one tough practical teacher.
He didn2019t want me to go home crying because of childhood fights."
Agustin was Bernie2019s first dojo instructor which helped him become physically and spiritually strong.
Bernie is grateful to have his father2019s music skill.
201cHe was my first music teacher in life, and for that, I won many singing contests too, wow!201d  
Being able to fight for what he believes in is the most precious lesson that Bernie learned from his father.
Bernie, who is now a top officer of a regional transport organization, owes his success to his father.
Agustin died just a month ago, and Bernie promised that he is going to teach his kids the same way his father raised and loved them.

"He left this world just more than a month ago, but his memories still linger in my mind.
I love him so much.
I2019m a father now, and am going to teach my kids the same way he did to us, his children.
May God bless him in heaven.
Today,  is my birthday, and I'm honoring you on my birthday, Papa Osting!"
"My dad is everything to me.
He is the only man in my life right now, my first love.
And just by thinking of losing him, breaks me into pieces.
If dad won2019t be around, it would feel like something is missing.
Life is much different with Daddy around," Ara Lincona, 20, told Sun.Star Cagayan de Oro.
For Vergie Baran, 32, she will not know what life would be like without her husband.
"I love my husband so much.
Even if I don't have a job right now, he sees to it that he takes care of the family and he is such a good father to our three children.
One day, he told me not worry because we are all in this together, and it made me cry, he understands.
Without Ernesto, I don't know what life is.
Happy father's day Pang! I will love you every day."

Life2019s duality brings experiences that would etch beautiful and ugly memories, and not a single person has come to this world without roots 2013 without fathers and mothers.
 
For Krystel Grace Calderon, 22 and a resident of Cebu City, losing her father while she was in first year college left her much pain.
"I lost my father last February 2012, I was still a college student by then and everything felt like walls were torn down," said Krystel.
Krystel regrets that she didn2019t have the chance to show how much she adored her father.
"He was sick for many years, he suffered from stroke, his speech and walking were impaired," she recalled.
She always longs to having a good time with her dad and envies it whenever she sees a father and daughter enjoying each other2019s company.
 
On her 18th birthday, it broke her heart that she didn2019t have the chance to have that dance with her father on her debut and the chance to have those heart-to-heart talks.
"Everything he is, is just simple, and I could not ask for more.
He is the best in his simplest way of expressing his love to me."
Growing up without a father was tough for Christelle, a 20 year-old resident of Surigao City.
"They always say, fathers teach us how to be tough in difficult situations.
Yes, he taught me to be one but by way of leaving me," she said.
Christelle's father left them to work abroad, but he found love in another woman2019s arms.
"It's hard, being the eldest with four siblings, you have to support your mom, you have to somehow take or fill the empty spot that your father left," Christelle shared.
Her father still supports them though, but "a hands-on father is different from a father who just sends you money and just like that."
Today, we honor our Papa, Daddy, Dad, Dada, Erpat, Tatay, or whatever names they are called.

It is this time of the year again that perhaps to pause a while, take a moment, look back and appreciate the man who held children2019s hands from the moment they were born until they learned to walk and face the cruel world.
 
Positive discipline vs corporal punishment, Positive discipline vs corporal punishmentKarlo Paolo R.
Pates, GENERAL SANTOS CITY -- Have you ever experienced being punished physically -- including getting spanked, paddled, not given food, and you were grounded  by your own parents or guardians for not following their instructions or as punishment as retribution for committing an offense?
Then you've been a victim of corporal punishment.
Plan International, a non-government organization that advocates collective action to promote non-violent and Protective Society for Children projects, said that children aged below 18 years of age are common victims of corporal punishment.
"Children are vulnerable to abuses and other kinds of exploitation even from their own household.
Due to their physical and psychological immaturity, they need safeguards.
That's why we2019re here for them," said Jayson Lozano, project manager of Plan International for Mindanao.
"These children needs our care, protection, and treatment," added Lozano during the Plan International-spearheaded three-day regional training on Child Protection and Child-Sensitive participated by both members of the Philippine Press Institute  and Kapisananng Broadcasters ngPilipinas  held last June 18 to 20 at the Sun City Suites here.
Common victims of corporal punishments are children in conflict with law , abandoned, physically abused, and sexually abused children, although children with normal lives are likewise victims.
Atty.
Rudolph Steve Juralbal, legal counsel of the Kapisanan ng mga Brodkaster ng Pilipinas, said that as of 2015, there are 86 laws that protect the rights of children here in the Philippines.
Some of the policies passed include the Republic Act 7610, or otherwise known as the "Special Protection of Children against Child Abuse,"  Revised Penal Code  RA 3815, the Child and Youth Welfare Code , and the Family Code of the Philippines .
In the latest survey of Pulse Asia Survey in 2011, the results showed that the corporal punishment is still practiced as a form of discipline.
Of this, 67 percent of parents use physical means to discipline their children and 83 percent of those parents also experienced corporal punishment when they were still children, while 41 percent of the parents said they will support a law that pushes for the prohibition of corporal punishment while 21 percent were undecided.
Zolcarnin Palao, project officer of Plan International, said that enforcing corporal punishment leaves negative effects on the children including the creation of fear, confusion, resentment, and anger.
"It also lowers their self-esteem, influence them with violence, obstructs child's cognitive functioning, and prevents them from developing moral values and empathy," Palao said in the vernacular.
Palao, however, mentioned that there are guiding principles to enforce positive discipline among the children.
"Encourage them to think and formulate their own opinions, you also need to talk them with rules and regulation, and even expectations.
Communication between the parents and children is the only way for this issue to be resolved," he added.
On the last day of the workshop, the participants went to Alabel town in Sarangani to interact with 30 advocates of Positive Discipline, the opposite of corporal punishment.
Bernadita Marcosa, 46, a barangay council staff and a mother of two boys, also admitted that she also experience corporal punishment when she was still a child but that she swore that she will not do the same to her children; only to occasionally catch herself doing the same.

"Isulod ko ug sako sa akong parents ug usahay dili pa kaon.
Siguro wala pa nakabalo akong parents ato na corporal punishment na diay to ug mali na to ," Marcosa said.
Marcosa, who started attending seminars on Positive Discipline last August 2014, said she understood about positive discipline only after these.
Plan International introduced them to the adverse effects of corporal punishment in their barangay, Spring, after their barangay was identified as among the areas where corporal punishment prevails.

"This a big challenge to us parents to enforce positive discipline not only inside our household but also to the community as well," Marcosa said in the vernacular.
 
Nicole, 12, a student at Alabel National High School  and one of the youngest members of the Youth for Children Advocates , said it needs the collective efforts of both children and parents to end corporal punishment.
"Kay kung dili pud pabadlong ang mga anak, dili man pud na masuko ang atong ginikanan ," she said.
She, meanwhile, thanked the contribution of Plan International in waking up the minds of the residents about positive discipline.
"We need to stop this tradition of corporal punishment so that the next generation will not experience this," Nicole said.
Myka, also a member of YFCA, said that although she did not experience corporal punishment, she is advocating positive discipline because she is aware that her friends are going through these harsh methods of disciplining.

"I encourage all the youth to take part in this advocacy because all of us have a responsibility.
We need to work together to break this problem," she added.
Luisa Cubog, Civic Society Organization  member who's also advocating Positive Discipline, admits that such advocacy is not easy since many are fixed on their ways.
"Ang lisod pud sa uban kay dili magpatabang.
Masuko kung mag-apil-apil ka sa ilaha.
Basta kung maingnan nako sila na mali sila sa ilang ginabuhat, naa na sa ilaha kung sundon nila or ipadayon.
Basta nagduol nako ,201d she said.
Palao, for his part, said they are optimistic about their campaign for positive discipline.

"We're really thankful for their support  but this is just the start.
Our objective here is to create an environment where children are safe from abuse and exploitation especially for the next generations," he said.
Ifugao fashion on the rise, Ifugao fashion on the riseMaria Elena Catajan, LAGAWE, Ifugao 2013 Five years ago, Abigail Mae Bulayangan started making her own shoes out of frustration over puny sizes which don2019t fit her big size 10.

Today her small enterprise may yet become the next shoe factory here.
Bulayangan said it was difficult for her to buy shoes because of her size and realized most women in the province had the same problem.
Bulayangan said she started with only two pairs of custom-made shoes for her own use, sourcing looms from locals, and began selling her pairs office to office.
201cI was a peddler before, bringing my products to different places and getting customers,201d she said.
Bulayangan said the shoe designs are her original creations but is subcontracting experts to make the actual footware, giving local shoemakers and local weavers a new enterprise.
201cI want to help businesses which are smaller than mine and to preserve the local weaving industry here,201d she stressed.
Bulayangan sells platforms, wedges, flats, espadrilles and slip ons, giving the women in the province a wide array of designs and sizes to choose from.
201cWe also custom make shoes and designs to the liking of the client,201d she said adding her prices for shoes range from P550 to P880.
Bulayangan said she contacts local weaving associations as well as individual weavers for the fabric.
Three years ago, she opened her own shop, Kenro Botique, which sold an initial 30 pairs.
201cWe use cloth that is used as table runners, not the 2018ikat2019 used for traditional attire,201d she said.
Bulayangan said she used available mediums to promote her products.
201cI started with Friendster before to get orders from friends abroad and other clients.201d
Today, her shop has a complete line of items ranging from bags, to dresses, pouches, purses, dolls and of course, shoes, having over two dozen weaves to choose from.
201cI started with dress designs only this year,201d she said.
Bulayangan started with her doll collection of traditional women in ikat weave depicting harvest, weavers and farmers in the province.
201cShoe fabric patterns and dress fabric patterns are different, we never use one for the other,201d she said.
Bulayangan said she is working with the Department of Trade and Industry and the Department of Science and Technology to acquire her own machines to produce her line of shoe products.
201cI want to show that fabrics here are not limited for the use of traditional wear,201d she said.
PH's first college specializing in microfinance opens in Laguna, PH's first college specializing in microfinance opens in LagunaBAY, Laguna -- A renowned development institution opened here on Monday the Philippines' first college offering a four-year entrepreneurship course with emphasis on microfinance.

The Center for Agriculture and Rural Development 2013 Mutually Reinforcing Institutions  said the program will equip aspiring entrepreneurs with complete knowledge and competencies to start and manage their own business.

"Card-MRI Development Institute will be the venue where students will be molded to be the future soldiers taking the nation out of poverty," Card-MRI said, adding it was their members who had requested to put up a school for their children.
 
To expand its reach, Department of Education Undersecretary for Partnership and External Linkages Undersecretary Mario Deriquito urged CMDI to offer the course to senior high school students and out-of-school youth.
Deriquito said in a newspaper article last April that various sources of data put the number of Filipino OSYs aged 15-30 at anywhere between 3 million and 4 million.
 
Of this number, the department said more than 1.9 million OSY have been mapped and listed in the database of Abot-Alam, an initiative that seeks to identify OSY and enroll them in appropriate program interventions in education, entrepreneurship, and employment.
Out of the 1.9 million OSY, Deriquito said 20 percent wanted to take up an entrepreneurship course.

201cIsang bagay ito na kailangang pag-isipan at pag-aralan dahil merong ganoong pangangailangan sa ating lipunan,201d said Deriquito at the school launch.
Card-MRI founder and managing director Jaime Aristotle Alip said that they are just waiting for the forms from DepEd so that they can work on Deriquito2019s proposal.
CMDI has 160 students for this school year who pay P215 per unit or around P7,000 per semester including miscellaneous fees.
Most of the students are sons and daughters of Card-MRI members.
For next year, Alip hopes to add more courses like microinsurance, business development services, accountancy, and information technology and build another school in Mindanao.
"Instituting CMDI into a tertiary school is a way of Card-MRI to improve the quality of life of many Filipinos and continually fight poverty in the country," Card-MRI said.

Card-MRI currently supports 1,823 scholars studying in different schools all over the country.

Road sharing: A bold experiment for Edsa, Road sharing: A bold experiment for Edsa
An ambitious experiment to solve the traffic anarchy on Edsa, Metro Manila2019s busiest highway, will be tried out on June 28 by a broad-based movement.
AN AMBITIOUS experiment to solve the traffic anarchy on Epifanio delos Santos Avenue , Metro Manila2019s busiest highway, will be tried out on Sunday by a broad-based movement that brings together government and civic officials, environment advocates and even cycling enthusiasts.
It2019s called the Edsa Evolution: Bayanihan sa Daan , and its organizers said it promotes the principle of road-sharing, commuter and motorist discipline, and the efficient use of pedestrian lanes.\xa0
Basically, Bayanihan sa Daan is a scheme that assigns Edsa2019s five lanes to specific road users, and in the process restore order in the notoriously congested thoroughfare.
The experiment will cover the stretch of Edsa from Mall of Asia  in Pasay City to Ortigas Avenue in Mandaluyong City.
The lane closest to the sidewalk will be reserved for pedestrians, the next lane for bikers, the third and fourth for provincial and city buses, and the fifth for private vehicles.
Private motorists will be allotted only one lane because less than one percent of one million Filipinos own cars.

201cWhy Edsa? If you can do it in Edsa, you can do it anywhere,201d environmental lawyer Antonio Oposa Jr., one of prime movers of Bayanihan sa Daan told a press conference last Monday.
The 23.8-kilometer Edsa passes through six cities, and between 600,000 and one million vehicles drive through it every day.
Oposa was able to involve in the movement the Office of the President, Metropolitan Manila Development Authority , Department of Transportation and Communications , Department of Environment and Natural Resources , Department of the Interior and Local Government , Department of Social Welfare and Development , civil society groups including Clean Air Asia, Philippine Medical Association, National Bike Organization, Firefly Brigade and other cycling groups, Integrated Bar of the Philippines, Partnership for Clean Air Asia.\xa0
201cFor this Sunday, nakausap namin yung mga bus operators na titigil sila sa bus stop.
2018Pag napuno sila, tsaka sila aalis bago sila titigil sa second bus stop which is far away.
Why far away? Because we are encouraging people to walk,201d Oposa said.
City buses will be allowed to load and unload passengers at Mantrade near Magallanes and Ortigas.\xa0
Bus operators assured the experiment organizers they will not field smoke-belching units on Sunday.
The MMDA will make available bicycles for free during the experiment.
 Supreme Court battle 
Before coming up with the proposal for Edsa, Oposa and other environmentalists asked the Supreme Court in February last year to compel government to devote half of all roads to motorized vehicles and/or Filipino-made mass transport systems.
The other half will be for covered sidewalks, all-weather bike lanes and urban gardens.

They also wanted the Department of Budget and Management  to allocate funds for the implementation of the road sharing scheme.
The SC has yet to come up with a decision on the case but whatever the outcome would be, Environment Secretary Ramon Paje had said the government has several plans in motion to help meet the standards and regulations set by the Clean Air Act of 1999.
These include the use of vehicles consuming clean and alternative fuel, establishment of provincial bus terminals outside Metro Manila, installation of fully automated monitoring stations to measure air pollution levels around the capital.
Oposa has high hopes that the road-sharing concept will eventually lead to a safer, convenient and efficient public transport system and improve the air quality along Edsa.
201cTo address the ever-worsening crisis of traffic congestion, we need to change the mindset of transportation 2013 from being about private cars to being about improving public transportation; from wasting road space for the use of a few, to making good use of road use of the public space for the many; from agawan at swapangan sa daan to cooperative heroism on the roads 2013 Bayanihan sa Daan,201d he said.
Aside from the road-sharing implementation, the proponents also plan to grow edible plants on Edsa2019s dividing island.\xa0
MMDA Chairman Francis Tolentino said he will need to consider the public2019s response to Edsa Evolution before adopting the scheme.\xa0
Tolentino said the plan of the Department of Public Works and Highways  for a major repair of Edsa should also be taken into account before the road-sharing scheme is implemented.

5 lessons in NBA final playoffs, 5 lessons in NBA final playoffsTHE showdown between the Golden State Warriors and the Cleveland Cavaliers had come to an end.
The Filipinos are one of the biggest basketball fans in the world.
Some became basketball critics during the first half of the game and concluded that the Warriors are taking control of the game.
They were so confident that the Warriors will walk away with the crown at Game 6 at the Cavalier's home court.
True enough, the Warriors ended their 40-year drought with a victory against the Cavaliers.
I am a Boston fan but I can't help myself but to admire the Warriors at their victory after their long slumber.
 As I reflect after the game, I realized that the life in the court is very much like our ordinary lives.
So, here are the five lessons in life that I've learned from the NBA finals.
1.
Follow your head coach's orders
Let God be the guide of your life.
During a week's stay in the Sacred Heart Novitiate in Novaliches as part of my exposure to Jesuit life, I learned something that keeps coming back regardless of the circumstance I am in: "When you say YES to God, there's no need for plan B."
During the game, the Warriors always listened to their head coach, Steve Kerr.
They absorbed every strategy and plan of their coach.
Their trust on their head coach made them more confident to overcome every obstacle in their path.
That's why they became the top seed in their conference.

Lesson in life: God is your head coach in life.
When God tells you to do something, even if you can't see why, trust that He has a good reason.
He can see parts of the field that you can't.
 Always say YES to God because he will lead you to something better than you imagined, just like what Steve Kerr wants for his team.
2.
Be unselfish and trust your teammates.
Basketball is a team sport that requires cooperation and contribution.
It is not a one-man army game wherein only the superstar will lead the team.
 Everyone must focus, work together and fulfill their individual roles for the common good of the team.
 During the finals, Lebron James is a walking triple double but he wasn't able to carry his team to Game 7.
 Individual greatness can be measured by winning a championship ring especially in basketball but for a person who always thinks of himself, he cannot get one.
Lesson in life: Always contribute, share and cooperate.
In our society today, we need to help each other and contribute to the success of our nation.
What made the state golden in Golden State? It is because they helped each other attain victory.
Let's be a warrior also to help our society so that we can be a GOLDEN STATE.
For politicians, stop being pa-epal in every project that you make.
If you're willing to serve, don't carry your name.
Always think of the people's money that you should use to help them get up and improve our society.
3.
Don't wait for Game 7 to win the championship.
Game 7 is always the highlight of the game in basketball because of the excitement induced by a "do or die" or "win or go home" game.
It is an exciting and nerve-breaking duel between the two teams in reaching the championship title.
However, the Warriors didn't wait for Game 7 to attain their title.
During the first half of the game, they were already in the lead.
Lesson in life: In life, the earlier you finish your task, the more time you have to relax.
In my five years of teaching, the most common problem of students is not bullying, academic performance or teachers.
It is procrastination, the practice of making something in the last minute.
We must get rid of our ma\xf1ana habit if we want to attain success in life.
If we can do it today, we should do it now.
4.
If the plays aren't working, re-adjust the game plan.
During the finals, Cleveland won Games 2 and 3 against the Warriors.
After two consecutive defeats, the team re-adjusted their game plan that led them to victory.
Every great basketball player knows that when your plays aren't working, you have to adjust and then adjust some more.
The varying strengths and styles of different opponents require different tactics.
You have to be able to withstand and respond to whichever attack an opponent uses on you.

Lesson in life: Everyday, we always complain about our work, other people and whatever happened to is.
Sometimes we need to ask ourselves, do we change ourselves? If not, then start changing now as the Michael Jackson hit, Man in the Mirror, says: "I'm starting with the man in the mirror/I'm asking him to change his ways/And no message could have been any clearer/If you want to make the world a better place/Take a look at yourself, and then make a change."
As my co-teacher, Mr.
Ariel Bendo once said "If you want to change the society, start from yourself and you can see the brighter tomorrow that you wanted to see." Before you re-adjust your game plan, make sure to re-adjust or start changing yourself first.
5.
Always give thanks to God.
Stephen Curry is one of the most dominant shooters of the league.
He proved it by breaking the record of the most number of shots posted in a single season set by Reggie Miller.
But what makes Stephen Curry different from other players? In his acceptance speech, he said: "First and foremost I have to thank my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ for blessing me with the talents to play this game, with the family to support me, day in, day out.
I'm his humble servant right now and I can't say enough how important my faith is to who I am and how I play the game." His humility and strong Christian faith makes him one of the most admirable players in the league.
Lesson in life: Sometimes, when we are happy, we tend to forget God.
We only remember him when the world is against us.
We must not forget to thank God in every blessing that we receive.
Even the moment we wake up in the morning is a blessing that we must thank God for because not all people can wake up and start a new life every morning.
Always give thanks to God because with him we can overcome our struggles in life.
Paul said to the Philippians, "I can do all things through Christ who strengthens me."
It is important to learn valuable life lessons by watching the game but success is not all about winning, it is all about learning and experience that will help us grow.
As Coach Wooden once said, "Success is peace of mind, which is a direct result of self-satisfaction in knowing you did your best to become the best that you are capable of becoming."
In the end, it is all about the lesson in life that we must share, success is not acquisition of power, prestige or financial wealth, it is values that we must pass in order to maintain the balance in this world.
So now, start it with person next to you.
Pass it on! 
Masbad: The next extinction, Masbad: The next extinctionRoark L.
Masbad, Wacky Tech, WE'VE heard a lot of climate change these past years.
We2019ve heard it being mentioned every now and then, and it gets a lot more media mileage when natural disasters strike.
Take for example, Yolanda/Haiyan.
When  that struck our country, a lot was said about how climate change is making these tropical storms stronger and deadlier.

Many say that climate change is not caused by us, humans, as we continue to pollute our planet.
Many more others say that it2019s our fault and that we need to do something about it soon.
But what strikes me more though is that though of extinction.
I recently read an article from National Geographic that talked about whether we would survive the 201csixth extinction201d.
Here2019s the opening paragraph of that article:
In the last half-billion years, life on Earth has been nearly wiped out five times -- by such things as climate change, an intense ice age, volcanoes, and that space rock that smashed into the Gulf of Mexico 65 million years ago, obliterating the dinosaurs and a bunch of other species.
These events are known as the Big Five mass extinctions, and all signs suggest we are now on the precipice of a sixth.

Read the entire article through this link.
It2019s a scary thought, if you ask me.
I2019m hoping though that it2019s scary enough to make everyone act soon and do something about the decimation we2019re inflicting on our only home world.
We haven2019t invented hyperdrives and hyperspace jumps and I don2019t think we2019re getting any close to it.
Heck, we don2019t even fully understand black holes yet.

We have limited technology at our disposable right now but these technologies are more than enough to help mitigate the effects of our continuing blatant disregard of our planet2019s health.
The question now, really, is whether we2019re good-hearted enough to use our collective skills to keep our Gaia breathing and healthy.
Young and gifted, Young and gifted
DAVAO.
Hijos de Davao 2015 muse, Margarita Rafaella Beatriz 201cMeg201d Jocson Ong, as first finalist in her school orchestra.
Jackie Garcia Dizon, JUNE 29, for Dabawenyos, is a day of thanksgiving and celebration.
It is the feast of San Pedro, Davao City2019s patron saint, as well as Hijos de Davao2019s 51st anniversary.
This year2019s feast is extra special for the Hijos, because it is not just a night of festivities, but also a chance to bear witness to the rise of the new generation.
Hijos de Davao is a socio-civic organization that was formed to nurture relationships among Dabawenyos.
It was founded in 1964 in the midst of the overpowering number of migrants in the City.
Hijos2019 primary goal is to preserve the true Dabawenyo culture, in a city that has been dubbed as a melting pot of culture.
In its 51 years of true service to the people, Hijos de Davao has proved that they are not just a social club, but a social club that works for the common good.
The new generation is embodied in this year2019s muse for the grand ball, Margarita Rafaella Beatriz 201cMeg201d Jocson Ong.
Beauty, brains, and equipped with a heart for the people 2013 much like what Hijos has been fanning through the past 51 years.
 Meg comes from the 4th generation of the Generoso-Cabaguio clan.
She is the great-granddaughter of lawyer Manuel Generoso Cabaguio and Esperanza Tan-Cabaguio.
She is not just a pretty face and she is definitely more than just her prominent name.
At 17 years old, she has outshone many in her various undertakings.
The years she had traveled the world in her pursuit of the arts and for a higher level of learning has only strengthened her love for her roots, and that path has led her back home.
Meg was born on February 19, 1998 to businessman Frederick D.
Ong and Gretchen Cabaguio Jocson-Ong.
Her mom, Gretchen, would describe her as kind hearted, down to earth, compassionate, and considerate.
201cShe has a soft spot for the less fortunate, sensitive to the needs of her loved ones, driven by her goals, and an obedient daughter.
And above all, a good Christian,201d her mom adds.
Meg spent her elementary years at the Poveda College in Manila and then transferred to the Garden International School, a British International School in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, which ranks among the top international schools in Asia.
Meg plans to take up a course on economic and finance in a university in the United Kingdom after graduation at the Garden International School next year.
Meg loves the piano and the violin, and has even won second place in the 2010 Australia-New Zealand Cultural Association Piano Competition, the only Filipino chosen among 30 music students in Malaysia.
From this feat, Meg was selected to take master classes in the world renowned Yehudi Menuhin School in the United Kingdom.
 Meg also loves horseback riding, and has been doing so since she was nine years old.
 
She has truly proven herself worthy of all the praises and has exceeded everyone2019s expectations.
Despite having known so many places and cultures in her life, Meg remains a Dabawenya at heart.
She says she is honored to be this year2019s muse as her mother had been before her.
Meg is definitely a role model and a source of inspiration, not just for the Hijos, but for all young Filipinos.
Tonight, Meg will grace the SMX ballroom as the first muse of Hijos de Davao's new generation.
She will be escorted by my one and only son, Phillip Marco Garcia Dizon.
To be inducted as 2015-2017 set of officers are: President Vincent J.
Garcia, Vice President Carmen Soriano-Diano, secretary Rowena Hizon-Daluz, treasurer Pilar Rosario E.
Rodriguez, assistant treasurer Maria Isabel Soriano-Lemen, business manager Jose Claro H.
Velez, and PRO Marissa Salonga-Tionko.
Board members are Atty.
Rose Marie T.
Cabaguio, Rochelle Rabat del Rosario, Edith Lizada Fuentes, Premie Salas, Trisha Porras-de Jesus, Gerry C.
Cabreros, Jose Francisco T.
Ledesma, and ex-officio Jacqueline Garcia-Dizon.
Advisers are Ma.
Lourdes Socorro Medina Estanislao, Rodolfo del Rosario Jr., Benjamin A.
Lizada, and Dr.
Luis T.
Gahol.
Aisat to unveil new tech course, Aisat to unveil new tech course
DEPARTMENT of Public Works and Highways  11 regional director Mariano R.
Alquiza led the distribution of awards to the agency2019s personnel who have rendered 40 years of service during its 117th anniversary.
The Awardees included Genevieve O.
Paclibar , Wilfredo N.
Poliquit , Construction Section chief Milagros E.
Delos Reyes  and District Engineer Fernando S.
Ongkingco, Jr .
Ace June Rell S.
Perez, THE Asian International School for Aeronautics and Technology  will introduce the first-of-its-kind Information Technology course dubbed as "Entertainment and Multimedia Computing"  in Davao Region next year.
Ronic Concepcion, Aisat IT Program head, said at the sidelines of the Kapehan sa Dabaw at the SM City Davao that the course will be offered to increase the number of local talents who will fill in the industry requirement as the demand on digitally-equipped talents increases.
"We are planning to open another digital arts course but it is still up for the Commission on Higher Education's  approval," he said.
He said around 50 to 60 percent increase of demand of IT talents is recorded by the Information and Communication Technology Davao Inc.
 this year.
The school sought partnerships with local firms in the IT industry for the implementation of its new course offering.
These IT companies are Visual Insights Multimedia, Cube Pixels, Outsource OK and Philippine Global Outsourcing.
Students who will enroll in EMC will choose between game development or animation when they reach on the second year of studying as their major subject.
Aisat is also set to open its extension building  on July 15.
Aisat is located at Sta.
Ana Avenue, corner Leon Garcia Street, Davao City.
Earlier, Aisat has also offered specialized courses on Animation NC II and Visual Graphics Design NC III.
A role model, A role modelRhona Goc-ong-Villariasa, IT DEMANDS a lot of hard work and sacrifices just to juggle his work as a Public Information Officer  of a government agency, at the same time, being the single parent to his seven-year-old son.
But for Mario Intong Daray, PIO of Social Security System  Davao branch, he remains optimistic, happy, and full of hope.
He has his father as role model.
While he was born in Kidapawan North Cotabato on July 16, 1957, the family moved to Bohol when he was still a child.

"Grade 1 to 6 lang ako sa Kidapawan, medyo magulo kasi yung lugar namin before, so lahat kami binitbit ng tatay namin papuntang Bohol," shares Daray, who at an early age lost his mom.
Despite of poverty and the hardship of raising eight siblings, Daray added that his father named Getolio, a former music teacher of Notre Dame of Kidapawan, remained enthusiastic, and struggled to provide for all their needs.

After his high school graduation at the Holy Name University in Bohol, he decided to be back in Davao to work, at the same time to continue his schooling.
"For one week, pumasok ako as tagahugas ng plato sa Mekenis Barbecue sa San Pedro, then I tried my luck, pina-apply naman ako ng cousin ko sa Ateneo College canteen."
His employer even enrolled him in Ateneo at a half scholarship grant.

"Pero kahit half scholar na ako di ko pa rin natapos, naka one semester lang ako, mahal pa rin kasi.
I stopped and transferred to University of Mindanao," he said.
Daray enrolled in a two-year Radio Operator Course in UM opening the door to venture into the broadcast industry.
He found work at dxSS Channel 7 in Bangkal.
From 1975 till 1979 he served at the Technical Department, until he became a radio reporter from 1979 to 1984.
"But 1984, nag-close ang dxSS nagkaproblema so tinanggal lahat ng empleyado.
Timing din na graduating na ako sa college.
Kasi while working sa broadcast I continued my college degree sa Rizal Memorial College , kumuha ako ng Commerce," he said.
He started as a temporary teacher at RMC, until the management gave him a permanent position.
For 12 years, Daray taught business subjects.

He said scholarship grants allowed him to finish a degree.
He moved to SSS in 1989 as Member Service Representative assigned at the Member's Assistance Desk.
"For 20 years, akong na-assign to that department then I became an OIC team head sa group."
It was in 2010 when the position for Sr.
Communication Analyst for SSS Davao Branch was offered.
With his skills, ability and experience, and after passing the exams and interview, Daray got the position, and became the frontliner of the agency.

For five years being a PIO, Daray shares that the task is not easy.

"Kung empleyado ka ng SSS, you should be patient, tolerant, caring and friendly.
Yung mga taong lumalapit sa iyo are persons in need," he said.
"Nung bago pa lang ako, di ko yan nararamdaman.
Kasi sa isip ko work then sweldo.
Lagi akong nakakakita ng away, but later on na-realize ko na being an employee of SSS you should have that empathy sa mga members na lumalapit sa iyo seeking some assistance."
Aside from a hectic schedule as PIO, he is also a hands-on father to Daniel, his 7-year-old son.
He disclosed that working and taking care of his son's welfare is not an easy job, but the fulfillment is something he is always proud to share.
"Kahit busy ako sa work, I really try my best to perform my function as a father and mother to him," he said.
Though he still dreams of finding a partner in life, Daray quips that if it's really his destiny to spend this kind of life, he would gladly accept it.
"At this point in my life, I'm not empty, I have my son.
Kung wala siya anong klaseng buhay kaya meron ako? If di man ako makahanap ng partner okay na sa akin, may anak na ako."
Buying a laptop and shareable content, Buying a laptop and shareable contentRoark L.
Masbad, Wacky Tech, SCHOOL year2019s just begun for a lot of us, and in most cases, these are the times that students will be begging their parents to get them a laptop for school work.
If you ask me, it2019d be wiser to invest on a laptop especially if you buy your kids one.
The need for one will be even greater if your son or daughter is enrolled in a course that2019s very multimedia-centric.

It doesn2019t hurt as well to think that in this day and age, a lot of work is done digitally.
So, this week, I2019m sharing with you an article from Techradar to help you find that perfect laptop for you without really having to break the piggy bank or burn a hole through your bank account.

You will find the article here.
And as a bonus, here2019s an infographic on how visual cues and images can help make your content more shareable.

Source: http://www.digitalinformationworld.com/


Elementary buds reach out to far-flung school, Elementary buds reach out to far-flung schoolLarry P.
Fabian, NANGALISAN, Tuba, Benguet -- For the urban raised and bred professionals, an outreach program to the less privileged, may mean more than a self-reflection of their blessings, but also giving a good example to their families.\xa0
A band of elementary schoolmates from the early 80s started doing this four years ago, but this time brought along their families to show how blessed they are than most other people in far flung places.\xa0
Dr.
Lizalyn Barros-Revilla and her batchmates annually visit Gallano Elementary School in Aringay, La Union, which is located near the boundary of Barangay Nangalisan in Tuba, Benguet.
Gallano is the farthest barangay of Aringay.\xa0
With their family members in tow, and this time, with members of the Philippine Dental Association-Baguio City, they trekked at least a kilometer, including a thirty feet high and forty meter span one-way hanging bridge, before reaching the school where 120 students and their parents had been expecting them yearly.\xa0
Lina , a grade two pupil was one of those who waited.
She and her grandmother walked five kilometers from their home to reach school early for the school kits to be given by the group.\xa0
201cHan nga makaturog, idi pay lang maysa nga domingo kalpas ipakaamo ni teacher da ,201d Lina2019s grandmother revealed.\xa0
Dr.
Jovy Yba\xf1ez, PDA-BCC chairman, immediately proceeded to conduct dental fluoride treatment with other dental volunteers to eager students.\xa0
201cFrom last year, we noticed the lack of oral health care, noticing that most of these children have tooth decay,201d Dr.
Yba\xf1ez explained.\xa0
As others received dental care, the school kits were distributed to the students, where Lina eagerly awaited her turn to be handed her eco-bag filled with needed school materials.\xa0
A wide grin of happiness lit up her face while checking out her new notebooks, pens and pencils, rulers and coloring pens.

201cAda pag surat kun, lola ,201d Lina said as she showed her grandmother her fist full with pencils and pens.\xa0
Dr.
Revilla, on the other hand, showed her two teenage sons how their presence means by letting them hand some of the school kits and talk to some of the students.\xa0
201cI want them to feel how doing these missions are being received and appreciated by these kids, as compared to them where everything is well provided,201d Revilla explained.\xa0
Marichu Trinidad, who came with her husband and small son, also joined in the distribution of goods.\xa0
201cI told my son how poor these kids are and that any help they receive today will help them continue their studies and like him, will one day graduate from school,201d Mrs.
Trinidad shared.\xa0
For now, Lina and the rest of her school mates will have a reason to walk from their homes to their schools, no matter how far, given their free school material and being encouraged to finish their education.\xa0
The batch of SLSCF of 85 will continue to provide lesser privileged public schools and their students with these items even as the funds used come mostly from their own pockets.
They say the payback is the joy they feel after seeing these children appreciate what they receive.\xa0
201cWe hope to give more, but so far this is what our money could just afford for now,201d Revilla said.

201cWe hope bigger and more roundly funded groups with kind hearts can also come to these unrecognized areas who could fix one of their dilapidated and condemned classroom which the school still use,201d she ended.
In-depth report: 4Ps further explained, In-depth report: 4Ps further explainedRuji Peter S.
Abat, SINCE the implementation of the Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program  in Davao Region in 2009, there has been a total 229,871 beneficiaries who have received cash grants from the Department of Social Welfare and Development  in Davao Region.

Davao del Sur made up the bulk of the beneficiaries at 84,510, but this is because Davao City, a chartered city and shouldn2019t have been included in the province, is included.
Davao City accounts for 20,301 of this total.

It is followed by Compostela Valley Province with 56,698, Davao del Norte with 47,838 and Davao Oriental with 40,825.
Beneficiaries are selected based on the data of the National Statistical Coordination Board  while DSWD also utilizes data gathered by its National Household Targeting System for Poverty Reduction .

The figures derived from both databases are then collated in the community level through social workers who conduct house-to-house visits for a more specific validation.
Families may receive as much as P1,400 every month.
Parents get P500 while each child of elementary to high school age get P300.
Only three children are given the cash grant in a family.
DSWD-Davao information officer for the 4Ps Sheryll Fernandez, in an interview with Sun.Star Davao, admitted that the cash grant is just a little, but this already means a lot to poor families.
 
"It is just an assistance for families so that they will have additional allowances to send their children to school and feed them," Fernandez said.

Fernandez reacts to criticisms that the program is but a dole-out.
She said there are conditions that are set for the family to receive the assistance and can thus not be considered as dole-out.
Students receiving the cash grants should at least have an 85 percent school attendance every month while they are also required to visit health care centers for regular checkup.

Mothers, meanwhile, should also have themselves checked in the health care centers and are obliged to attend family development sessions.
If these conditions are not met for the first time, beneficiaries will get a verbal reprimand while the next non-compliance would entail a written reprimand from the regional director.
The third offense would cause the suspension of cash grants for a month while those who fail to comply for the succeeding months may be delisted from the program.

"We strongly believe that it is not a dole out since they have to follow these conditions.
After all, if they follow these conditions we could help families keep their children in school while they can also maintain good health," Fernandez said.

But she was quick to add that they do not directly delist beneficiaries as they let social workers conduct the social case management to identify why some beneficiaries fail to comply.
The social workers are then tasked to conduct interventions in order for beneficiaries to get back to following the conditions.

In relation to the delisting of beneficiaries, data from DSWD-Davao showed that a total of 1,979 were already excluded from the beneficiaries.
Most of the delisted beneficiaries have opted to waive themselves off the program while some were excluded after they were deemed ineligible due to the increase in their salary.

Fernandez, however, admitted that they are also forced to delist the so-called inclusion errors, saying: "Our system is not perfect and there are those who are included even though they are not actually eligible.
So what we do is we let our social workers validate their eligibility and if they are not really eligible then we delist them." 
DSWD has also bore the brunt of having fraudsters who pose as marginalized people and later on social workers would find out that they are actually disqualified for the program.

"Some of the beneficiaries intentionally refuse to disclose their other assets when they are being interviewed by social workers.
We would then discover that they have other properties or assets elsewhere so we also delist them," Fernandez said.

It has been six years since the program has been implemented but Fernandez said none of the beneficiaries have graduated from the program due to the changes implemented by President Benigno Aquino III last year.
Before, cash grants were only provided to children aging 14 and below, yet under Aquino's administration, the cash assistance was extended to those who are on their way to high school.
Those in the secondary level of education, meanwhile, receive P500 each month instead of the P300 that elementary students get.
Due to the extension of the program to high school level, DSWD has yet to fully assess how the 4Ps has actually aided in the entirety of their poverty alleviation programs.

"So far, the assessments come from the success stories of our beneficiaries.
Our monitoring and evaluation also has a case management tool called the Social Welfare Indicator, which determines the level of well-being of our beneficiaries but since the program has extended we have yet to determine when a beneficiary should graduate from the program," Fernandez said.

The levels of well-being, Fernandez said, include survival, subsistence and self-sufficiency.
Those in the survival level could be considered the poorest of the poor as members of the households under this level are usually unemployed and lack the technical skills.

Households within the subsistence level, meanwhile, are those with only one parent or adult member who sustains the family.
Self-sufficient level means at least two members of the household who are skilled enough to land regular jobs.
These indicators have yet to be consolidated but the DSWD still considers 4Ps as one of its flagship programs amid its uncertainty in addressing poverty.

"For as long as this program helps families keep their children in school while keeping families healthy as well, then the program will continue.
Anyway, those who will graduate in the 4Ps are most likely to qualify for other programs of the DSWD," Fernandez added.
In-depth report: No-read, no-write, no more , In-depth report: No-read, no-write, no more Ivy C.
Tejano, TO RISE above the discrimination that Badjaos have been subjected through the past decades is now a mother2019s dream for the rest of her children who can still catch up after being shown what it takes.

Gelin Amelita Rendo said she realized this after going through the Basic Literacy Program conducted by the City Link through the Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program  of the Department of Social Welfare and Development .

The 4Ps is a human development measure of the national government that provides a conditional cash grants to the poorest of the poor to improve the health, nutrition and education of their children.

Gelin is among the Badjao beneficiaries living at Purok 4B, Barangay 23 C, Mini-Forest, Boulevard.
She has eight children named Roni, Freddie, Tambi, Tinang, Totong, Lupin, Mina and Shenie with her husband Rhojz.
 
Reading, writing, 'rithmetic
201cWa rako kabalo sa ilang edad.
Ang magulang minyo na tua nay duha ka anak.
Duha sa ila minyo na, anaay uli-tawo, kini si Tambi nay depekto, uban bata pa tua nag eskwela ,201d Gelin told Sun.Star Davao.
 
The elder five are all out of school, four of whom have only been in elementary school.
Tambi, because of his disability, has not been in school.
The youngest three are still in school.
Lupin is in grade 7 at the Sta.
Ana National High School, Mina is in grade 4, and Shene is in grade 1 at the Roxas Elementary School.
 
Gelin is a beneficiary of the 4Ps for five years already.
She was one of the victims of the biggest fire that raged through three barangays in Quezon Boulevard on April 4, 2014, thus she also received a total of P20,000 cash assistance from the City Government.
She is thankful for 4Ps because it allowed them to send their youngest children to school and for giving her an opportunity to learn as well.

It was in year 2013-2014 when she attended her first Basic Literacy training, which she described as a 201cmemorable and happiest day201d of her life.
201cNag-sayaw pa gani ko.
Lingaw kaayo.
Nakabalo na ko mubasa'g sulat, kabalo napud ko mo ihap.
Kami sa akong bana kahima-o na maninda kay di naman mi dali ma-ilad kay kabalo naman mi moihap ,201d Gelin said.

201cSa una nga wala pa ang 4Ps sigera mi salom sa dagat.
Usahay gapangayo dira dalan, sa mga tawo.
Diri rapud ko naka-agi makasulod hotel ug mukaon tong sa2019mo training.
Mao na importante gayud ange skwela nako sa2019ko mga anak ,201d she added.
  
For now, Gelin said, she does not worry about her children2019s expenses in school, as she learned how to budget the allowance given to them through the 4Ps.
She added that all she has to do is to guide her children and remind them on the importance of education.
  
Marginalized 
The Badjao inhabit the shore and water of the Sulu archipelago.
Others went to Davao, Surigao, Zamboanga and even Manila, among other cities, in search of better livelihood.
 
City Link social worker Elena Bejarasco-Alingalan said that aside from the aid that 4Ps has provided for its beneficiaries, she also find helping the Badjaos through 201cBasic Literacy Program and Life Recovery Program.201d 
201cI asked a close friend of mine who is a teacher, I said teach, naluoy ko sa mga nanay na muadto sa Bankerohan di kabalo mubasa ug muihap .
So, we started to conduct this basic literacy program November 2013 diin monthly sila gitudloan ,201d Alingalan said.

The first module was to teach them to read.
After a year, Alingalan said, she partnered with Nelson Gamao of the Department of Education  to teach the Badjaos in the community to write.
At least 30 Badjaos along with several from the Manobo tribe from Barangays 22-C, 23-C, 31-D, 39-D and 40-D, underwent to the Basic Literacy Program, which provides free training in reading, writing, math and basic work skills, Alingalan said.
The Life Recovery Program teaches spirituality, whatever their religions are.
They are taught about love for self, family, and humanity in general.
Though this is beyond the 4Ps function, Alingalan said, to see the Badjao transformed into educated individuals is an achievement, not for her, but for the Badjao community; a priceless gift for the people like them who has been deprived of several things.
 
For the poorest 
The 4Ps operate in 17 regions in the Philippines, covering 79 provinces, 143 cities, and 1,484 municipalities.
Record obtained from the DSWD revealed that as of March 2015, it has enlisted 4,425,845 households, of which 558,609 are indigenous and 223,344 have at least one person with disability .

The program also covers 11,058,303 schoolchildren aged 0 to 18, from the total registered with an average of two to three children per household.

They are selected through the National Household Targeting System for Poverty Reduction , which identifies who and where the poor are in the country.

In general, the following criteria must be satisfied to become eligible for the program: residents of the poorest municipalities, based on 2003 Small Area Estimates  of the National Statistical Coordination Board  Households whose economic condition is equal to or below the provincial poverty threshold Households that have children 0-18 years old and/or have a pregnant woman at the time of assessment Households that agree to meet conditions specified in the program The 4Ps has two types of cash grants that are given out to household-beneficiaries: Health Grant: P500 per household every month, or a total of P6,000 every year Education Grant: P300 per child every month for ten months, or a total of P3,000 every year  For a household with three children, a household may receive P1,400 every month, or a total of P15,000 every year for five years, from the two types of cash grants given to them.

These cash grants are distributed to the household-beneficiaries through the Land Bank of the Philippines or, if not feasible, through alternate payment schemes such as Globe G-Cash remittance and rural bank transactions.

As of March 2015, a total of P9.2 billion cash grants were paid to eligible and compliant beneficiaries in the first period of 2015 covering January to February disbursements.
From this amount, P5.3 billion was paid for education, and the remaining P3.9 billion was disbursed for health.

In order to receive the abovementioned subsidies, all the succeeding conditions must be met by the household-beneficiaries:
* Pregnant women must avail pre and post-natal care, and be attended during childbirth by a trained professional.
* Parents or guardians must attend the family development sessions, which include topics on responsible parenting, health, and nutrition.
* Children aged 0-5 must receive regular preventive health check-ups and vaccines.
* Children aged 6-14 must receive de-worming pills twice a year
* Children-beneficiaries aged 3-18 must enroll in school, and maintain an attendance of at least 85 percent of class days every month.
High compliance rates were recorded for the months of January and February 2015: 99.17 percent for the de-worming of children aged 6-14; 96.89 percent for school attendance of children aged 6-14; 96.53 percent for school attendance of children in daycare aged 3-5; 95.82 percent for health visits of pregnant women and children aged 0-5; 95.30 percent for attendance in family development sessions; and 92.74 percent for school attendance of children aged 15-18.
Envisioned lives after 4Ps, Envisioned lives after 4PsAce June Rell S.
Perez, WHAT happens after a family graduates from being beneficiaries of the Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program , the government2019s conditional cash transfer program?
With around 4.1 million household beneficiaries of the 4Ps, the Department of Social Welfare and Development  is still determining whether the program has changed the lives of families for the better.

But it admits that they still do not have any graduates from the program yet, because of the additional two years to the education of the children before they graduate from high school following the passage of the Kinder to 12 years Enhanced Basic Education Program .
As of March 2015, the program has a total of 333,673 High School graduates, 14,411 of which are from Davao.
The 4Ps beneficiaries were also monitored and evaluated regularly through the Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation Office to gauge the program2019s effectiveness.
Monitoring progress 
201cWe do the planning, monitoring and evaluating, we are responsible of providing data, information or idea about the program, where it is heading to and what are the challenges of it,201d said Margie G.
Cabido, monitoring and evaluation officer.
In monitoring, different tools are being utilized, the internal and external monitoring.
The Monitoring and Evaluation team assessed the program2019s beneficiaries according to its Social Welfare and Development Indicator or the Level of well being.
The beneficiaries will be determined into three levels: survival, subsistence and self-sufficient.
Those beneficiaries identified as "survival" means they are below the poverty threshold, subsistence means they can provide just enough necessities like food and shelter to live with the program2019s intervention while beneficiaries under the level of self-sufficient means they can already provide on their own without the assistance of the program, the highest level among the categories.
201cLevels of well being of the specific beneficiary is identified and assessed not just with its economic status but including many indicators like education, health condition, employment,201d she added.

Current picture
4Ps beneficiary Rosalinda Bongulan, 39, a resident of Barangay 23 in Davao City, and belonging to the Badjao tribe from Jolo, Sulu, said four of her children have been under 4Ps although there are only two now since the two other elder children already graduated from high school.
 
The money they get not only goes for school expenses but also used as additional capital for her husband who sells sunglasses on the streets.

According to the DSWD2019s data of 2013, a total of 1,065 beneficiaries are under self-sufficient category, two percent of the total population, subsistence individuals are 167,940 almost 90 percent of the total beneficiaries, and 15,502 who are under survival about eight percent of the figure.

Empowering beneficiaries 
Other than the welfare of the children, one of the requirements of the 4Ps is the Family Development Sessions  wherein one of the parent beneficiaries is required to participate one a month.
DSWD-Davao City Link Elena Alingalan said that through these sessions, they have encouraged their beneficiaries, especially the Badjaos, to send their children to school.
201cIf we will compare education for them before, it is nothing, walang bearing sa kanila, walang value but now with this program , makita nimo nga ang nanay gusto na magpa-eskwela ng anak niya ,201d Alingalan said.
Road to self-sufficiency
With the ultimate goal of self-sufficiency for beneficiaries, DSWD created the Sustainable Livelihood Program  in 2013.
SLP, according to Maria Victoria Arancon, DSWD-Davao SLP program development officer II, has two tracks: first is the micro-enterprise development wherein they provide skills training and cash assistance of as much as P10,000 for them to start their business.
The second track is the employment facilitation, which is done in partnership with Technical Education and Skills Development Authority wherein they encourage the participants to acquire a National Certificate II and helps them find jobs fit for their skills earned.
 
For this year, DSWD-Davao is targeting a total of 21,190 beneficiaries for its Sustainable Livelihood Program.
Quo vadis, 4Ps?, Quo vadis, 4Ps?Karina V.
Canedo, PANTAWID Pamilyang Pilipino Program  has become the life and sustenance of many poor families.
But with elections looming ahead, there is no assurance that this will be continued by the next administration.
What would happen then to the beneficiaries?
Elena Alingalan, a social worker of Barangay 23-C, Davao City, said she believes 4Ps will be continued by the next administration because this is part of the programs designed to meet the Millennium Development Goals , which incidentally is supposed to be reached this year.

201cWe can2019t say for sure, but since this is part of the MDGs that we signed as a commitment to fulfill, then it is likely that the program will be continued by the next president,201d she said in the vernacular.

During President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, when the conditional cash transfer program was first implemented, the beneficiary should have children between 0-14 years old.
Just last year, under President Benigno Aquino III2019s time, the age was increased to 18 years old because of the additional years in high school as mandated by the Kinder to 12 years Enhanced Basic Education Program .
Sheryll Fernandez, 4Ps information officer for Davao Region, said that it is important to ensure that the children covered finish high school.

201cMore opportunities await those who graduate from high school and that is what the DSWD is looking at,201d she said.
Gelin Amelita Rendo, 43, a resident of Barangay 23-C, Davao City and a member of Badjao tribe, said the 4Ps allowance enables her to send her three younger children to school.
Her five elder children did not reach high school.
She added that many among her tribe have also learned how to read and write like she did in the attached basic literacy program thus weaning them away from begging.
Rendo sells ukay-ukay at the Agdao Public Market while her husband sells cellphone casings and belts around the city.
The cash she receives from 4Ps every two months goes to her children2019s school expenses and additional capital for her ukay-ukay.
201cPadayunon lang unta hantod sa hantod ,201d Rendo said.
Arlyn Limato Quimque, 37, a housewife in Barangay 23-C, also has words of thanks for the program as it lightens the burden of sending six children to school.
201cNaa jud koy ginapaabot kung nay bayronon ang mga bata ,201d she said.
 
Quimque has one at Sta.
Ana High School and two at Sta.
Ana Elementary School who covered by 4Ps.
Her husband works as an automotive technician who can earn as much as P4,000 to P5,000 a week when he has a client, but this does not happen all the time.
Aside from financial help, Quimque most appreciates the Family Development Seminars, which she said, empowers her.
201cKaron nakasulod nami sa 4Ps nakabalo nami nga bawal diay magpadaugdaug, isog nang mag asawa karon kay sa una magpakulata lang man karon makabalo nami asa mudagan sa panahon nga ing-ana ,201d she said.
Both Quimque and Rendo always attend the Family Development Seminars, afraid that they would face sanctions and be delisted.
Despite this positive feedback, 4Ps is not free of controversies.
There are talks that this is being used by politicians to get votes.
While this has been denied, there has been a series of delisting of beneficiaries included due to error, fraud, and those who were found to have regular income sources.
Last May, DSWD Davao Region removed 18,024 families from the list of Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program  beneficiaries since 2009.
As of last April, Davao Region, had 232,553 households in the program, with 85,535 coming from Davao del Sur, 47,961 from Davao del Norte, 41,718 from Davao Oriental and 57,339 from Compostela Valley.
In a report on Manila Bulletin earlier this year, it was said that as of March 2015, the bill for the institutionalization of 4Ps has already been approved by House Committee on Poverty Alleviation.
Meanwhile, the government increased the budget for the 4Ps program from P62.6 billion in 2014 to P64.7 billion this year.
DSWD: 4Ps is epal-free, DSWD: 4Ps is epal-freeKarlo Paolo R.
Pates, AMID suspicions that the conditional cash transfer  program of the National Government, the Department of Social Welfare and Development  in Davao assured that politicians do not have a hand in selecting beneficiaries.
CCT gives cash assistance to the poorest of the poor provided they fulfill some obligations with regard maternal and child health and education.
DSWD-Davao information officer for the Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program  Sheryll Fernandez they are ensuring that their operations are 201cepal-free.201d
4Ps is a conditional cash transfer program initiated by the government.
It aims to address the poverty problems of Filipino households on a short-term basis, investing in health and education of kids ages 18 years old and below.

The family beneficiaries are given P1,400 cash assistance every two months of the year.
"Wala po silang  power to include and delist families as beneficiaries of 4Ps," Fernandez told Sun.Star Davao in a recent interview at their office.
Fernandez said that the enforcement of the anti-epal campaign is one of their initiative to inform the beneficiaries that politicians are not involved in the implementation of the program.
201cWe repeatedly tell beneficiaries that they should not believe claims by politicians that they can delist families.
They don2019t have that power,201d she said.
 
In order to strengthen their anti-epal campaign, DSWD has been partnering with other government agencies including Commission on Elections , Department of Education , and Department of Interior and Local Government  to monitor the actions of some national and local candidates.
All agencies are collaborating, she said, to finally put a stop to these wrong impressions.
Fernandez said that beneficiaries who experienced being threatened or influenced by any politicians through DSWD's program may submit their grievances and reports to their regional office.
"Kung may grievances sila on the matter, pwede sila magsubmit  through our social workers who are stationed in each specific areas.
If we receive any complaints, we will forward it to the Comelec and DILG sa Manila and they will be calling the attention of the involved candidates," Fernandez said.
The 4Ps program has also been criticized by some for being the roots of corruption among its implementers.
But Fernandez insists that government personnel do not have access to the funds.
"Yung ayuda na ibinibigay natin sa ating mga isang beneficiary ay hindi dumadaan sa kamay ng ating mga personnel.
Pumapasok derecho yung mga incentives sa kani-kanilang mga ATM accounts," Fernandez said.
Listahanan or Talaan ng Pamilyang Nangangailangan is a database used by DSWD to determine and identify which households are eligible and qualified as beneficiaries.
Arlyn Limato Quimque, a mother of six kids, and a resident of Barangay 23-C in Davao City, who has been a beneficiary since 2008, admitted she did not know anything about 4Ps before.
201cSa una abi namo hinabang lang gikan kay Mayor pero kadtong naexplain na gyud sa amoa didto mi nakabalo na dako diay ni ug pwede maitabang sa amoa ," Quimque said.
Quimque said that 4Ps has been helping them a lot, especially when their house was razed along with more than 1,000 others in the April 2014 fire at Isla Verde and Mini-Forest that affected more than 3,700 families.
She said that not once had any politician approached her family with regards 4Ps.
"So far, wala man pud mi nakaexperience na duolun ug pulitiko ug pugsun mi na mubuto sa iyaha ," Quimque said in a separate interview at their residence.
Elena Alingalan, a social worker designated in the barangay, said that they don't allow any gatherings for 4Ps beneficiaries during election period so that the program cannot be taken advantage of.
"Even gani mga brgy.
officials ginamonitor nato ," she added.
According to Alingalan, the implementation of the anti-Epal Campaign is essential to avoid any forms of abuse.
Meanwhile, Fernandez said that the implementation of the 4Ps program is also extended even to the Indigenous People  and peasant groups in far-flung areas.
But as of late, some lumads and peasants in provinces of Davao del Norte and Davao Oriental have accused the Armed Forces of the Philippines  of threatening them of being delisted as beneficiaries in the said program.
In a recent statement furnished to Sun.Star Davao, Pasaka spokesperson Isidro Indao said: 201cParents of students enrolled in Salugpongan Ta Tanu Igkanogon Community Learning Center  and MISFI Academy in Sitio Mantapay, Limot and Bagangan, Brgy.
Binondo, Baganga, Davao Oriental are threatened by elements of the military that they will not be able to receive their CCT if they continue to patronize the schools which the military maliciously accused as NPA institutions.201d 
However, Army's 10th Infantry Division  spokesperson Lieutenant Vergel Lacambra denied the accusations, saying these claims are just forms of propaganda of the said groups.
"Hindi gawain ng mga sundalo yan na mag-threaten ng mga civilians.
Gusto nga natin silang madevelop yung areas nila at mabigyan ng government interventions," Lacambra said.
Lacambra said they do not have power to delist beneficiaries since the program is under DSWD.
Fernandez affirmed the statement of Army, saying that only committee members of the program can delist them should they violate parameters that include fraud, among others.
"Walang right and power and military to remove beneficiaries from the program.
Yan yung tandaan nila.
DSWD lang naay capacity to add or remove beneficiaries," Fernandez said.
As of April, Davao Region had 232,533 households in the program, with 85,535 coming from Davao del Sur, 47,961 from Davao del Norte, 41,718 from Davao Oriental, and 57,339 from Compostella Valley.
Home is the warrior, Home is the warriorYOU are not a Dabawenyo if you are not familiar with or heard of the legendary warrior, Kumander Parago.
While only his men, a spattering of government officials, and journalists and some lawyers and a courtroom maybe when he was once incarcerated, his name preceded his presence.
The Pulang Bagani Command of the New People's Army led by Leoncio Pitao, alias Ka Parago, is described by activists as a front that fights for a just cause but is regarded as a band of bandits by the military.

The Armed Forces of the Philippines, who formed the "Task Force Minion," claimed that they neutralized Ka Parago and his guerilla medic Vanessa Limpag, aka Ka Kyle, in an encounter in Paquibato district last June 28.
But family members and progressive groups claimed it was a raid where the sick Parago was killed, unarmed.
Interestingly, while the military posted photos of the bodies of Parago and Kyle in Facebook accounts soon after, these were removed.
But it was clear there that Parago was wearing a checkered polo and slippers and had a huge laceration at the back of his head.
This most wanted leader was in fact a soft-spoken warrior.
A few years ago, a group of media practitioners got the chance to mingle with him after he turned over their so-called "prisoners of war" to Davao City Mayor Rodrigo Duterte.

This well-noted warrior was at the forefront of audacious raids against the military and police outposts including the abduction of Brigadier General Victor Obillio and Captain Alex Montealto in 1998, which earned him warrants of arrests for murder, robbery and multiple frustrated murder.
Her wife, Evangeline, meanwhile, said that the death of her husband is not just a loss to their family but to the masses who believe in his ideologies.
"It's not the fight between the rebels and army but for the cause of the masses and the oppressed." 
Rest in Peace, Kumander Parago!
Wired at the top, Wired at the top
Luis Pineda
Ace June Rell S.
Perez, THE man of vision and innovation...
Luisito "Luis" Pineda, president and country general manager  of IBM Philippines, one of the largest multinational company in the world, is proud Dabawenyo.
"I love Davao and it feels really home whenever I'm here," he proudly said.
Born and raised here in Davao, he studied elementary at the Ateneo de Davao University  until 12 years old when their family immigrated to the United States of America.
"He went ahead of all of us and he would come home every year, and then finally when I was 12 he told us we were all moving to the States," he said, adding they migrated because at that time  was a difficult period for the Philippines.
Luis and his family settled at Seattle, Washington.
He earned his Bachelor of Science in Computer Science at the University of Washington.
He earned his position now through sheer hard work and dedication for 23 years in the company.

He joined IBM's Silicon Valley Lab in 1991 and within three months he invented a Computer Aided Software Engineering product, which resulted in a 10-fold improvement in productivity for developers.
He also also helped several successful businesses in IBM and co-founded one of the first services businesses to utilize offshore capabilities in delivering complex Enterprise Solutions to clients worldwide.
He initiated the world's first wireless banking solution, utilizing Wireless Application Protocol  at Svenska Handelsbanken, created offshore delivery centers in Belarus, Jordan, China, India, Latvia, and Russia, and started the first Software Group Technical Support Center in the Philippines.
Prior to his appointment as CGM, he was a Vice President, Client Support and Success, Industry Cloud Solutions, IBM Software Group.
As president and CGM, he is responsible for IBM's operations in the Philippines, including Sales and Distribution, and IBM's fully-owned subsidiaries offering IT and IT-enabled global delivery services, IBM solutions delivery and IBM Business Services.

"If given the chance to speak before a crowd of graduating Elementary and High School students in my alma mater, I would love to take the opportunity to give inspiration to the young generation and make them believe that dreams could be real only if you do something to make it happen," he said.
49 youths 2018baptized2019 as 2018green2019 ambassadors, 49 youths 2018baptized2019 as 2018green2019 ambassadorsTHIS was the daunting challenge made by Environmental Management Bureau  regional director Sabdullah Abubacar, PhD, to the 49 youths 201cbaptized201d as the new 201cgreen201d ambassadors through the recently concluded Environmental Youth Camp  held at Mapawa Nature Garden in Barangay Cugman, Cagayan de Oro City, in celebration of Environment Month in June.

The two-day event themed 201cOur Environment, Our Welfare201d was sponsored by the Filinvest-led FDC Misamis Power Corporation  in coordination with EMB-Northern Mindanao.
Participants were a mix of secondary and tertiary students from schools in the towns of Tagoloan and Villanueva in Misamis Oriental and cities of Iligan and Marawi in Lanao del Norte.
Abubacar, in his speech, told to the young participants that 201cno one can ever escape now from rapid developments.201d
201cAnd as we develop, we have no more escape from global warming.
But still, you need to think globally,201d he advised the participants.
Abubacar underscored the essence of a sustainable and balanced development through protecting the environment in the midst of progress in the country now.
201cThat2019s why you are here .
We educate you about the basic environmental laws, and we train you how to take care of our environment and even how to survive amid disaster.
Because we want you to be the next front liners in the 2018war2019 against environment destruction,201d he continued.

Optimistic, defender
FDC Misamis Plant Manager Engineer Luis Lagrania also shared similar insights and wisdom of Abubacar, stressing to the young participants the need to be optimistic for change and development and, at the same time, must also genuinely care for the environment.
Lagrania, in his speech during the opening of EYC, also vividly echoed to the participants FDC Misamis2019 prime message: 201cWe2019re into progress, but we also care for the environment and we will not compromise the future of our children!201d He believes that the youth still have both the heart and mind, not to mention the power to assume dual responsibilities to becoming agents of change and defenders of our environment.
FDC Misamis, a subsidiary of the Gotianun-led FDC Utilities, Inc., is currently building a 3 x135 megawatts circulating fluidized bed  coal thermal plant within the Phividec Industrial Estate in Villanueva town.
The plant, expected to address power woes in Mindanao and boost economic dealings within the archipelago in the next 25 years, will start its commercial operations next year.
Great, educational
201cIt was a great experience and very educational,201d was how John Francis Natad of Tagoloan National High School  described the EYC.
Natad, an EYC leadership awardee, vowed to share to his fellow students what he learned about environment, pollution, Mother Earth, development, industrialization, among others.
He is also bent to relay to his classmates the story of the 350-year-old mysterious Dao tree in Mapawa.
201cBut the most important thing I have learned in EYC is for us not to abuse our environment,201d he declared.
For Edris Badron, Jr.
of Mindanao State University  in Marawi City, learning about ecology and its importance to human lives as well as the basic environmental laws like the Clean Air Act and Clear Water Act are great add-on knowledge for him being a mechanical engineering student.
Putting up a plant nursery in their home and proposing programs related to solid waste management and clearing of waterways in their school campus in Marawi City are two things in his mind now.
201cThe basic facts about pollution and the mitigating measures how to avert future disasters, and the benefits that the industries could give to our community are now ingrained in my consciousness,201d said Abalin Petagara, a 9th grader from Tambobong-Balacanas Integrated School .
Expectations, applications
Riolama Rachma Saruang, EMB-Northern Mindanao consultant on environmental strategic planning and EYC head counselor, is confident that what the youths learned from EYC will be echoed to their fellow students in their respective schools and communities.
201cI also expect the schools to enhance the students2019 learning from EYC, especially in crafting programs and projects related to environmental protection,201d added Saruang.
She also said that they will continue coordinating with FDC Misamis and the participating schools on follow-ups of students2019 outputs after EYC.
Kenn Avila, a Science teacher from TNHS, who was in-charge of their student-participants in EYC, said she2019s expecting to apply in their school what they have learned on solid waste management and recycling.
Music, Arts, Physical Education and Health  teachers Theresa Macaslang of TBIS and Harold Abrio of Villanueva National High School  believe that their participants will echo to their fellow students their learning about environmental issues, pollution and how these things affect human health.
Transparency, synergy
However, Abubacar hoped to see the 49 young participants as 201cchanged201d persons after EYC.
201cBeing the new ambassadors of environment, I want them to have self-confidence and develop synergy in doing 2018magic2019 to our environment.201d
201cI also want the participants to be equipped with knowledge of the three pillars of sustainable development: the environmental sanctity, economic benefits and social equity,201d Abubacar added.
But most of all, the EMB director stressed that he really wants to inculcate to the mind of the participants the word transparency in working hand-in-hand for the good of the environment even at the rising industrialization anywhere in the country now.
2018Flame of passion2019
Hamim Dimnang, one among the EYC counselors, on the other hand, believed that after the two-day event, the young participants will now carry the 201cflame of passion201d to care for the environment.
Also, he asserted that training them on team work, survival and camaraderie through calamity drill and amazing race will help boost their confidence as individuals expected to be the next vanguards of environment.
This as Abubacar clearly emphasizes to the youth, 201cwe2019ll not leave a tattered environment to our children, so, let2019s fix now whatever mess we have in our environment.201d
Meanwhile, the EYC, an event listed under FDC Misamis2019 corporate social responsibility  compass, is part of the company2019s commitment to care for the environment with the future generations in mind.

The road back home, The road back homeEVERYONE was in a hurry.
 Some rushed down the stairs while others waited patiently for the elevator.
The class just ended and the students had new lessons learned.
Lessons that would help them create an article for their new assignment.
 
The assignment was due tomorrow before 12 noon and she knew she had to get home soon.
So she rushed to the elevators like everyone else, pushed in just so she can fit in.
It was just a few minutes ride but it was taking up too much time for them who had to meet deadlines.
 Ding! The elevator door opened and noise filled her ears.

A lot of people were rushing to the gates and she felt like she had seen the same scene before, last night, the night before and the night about a week ago.
Every night was the same, it was like d\xe9j\xe0 vu.
  The same scene over and over again, for her it was tiring.
She always had to rush that she wasn2019t able to notice what was happening around her.

That night was different.
  She looked at the people around her, some were talking to someone on their phone, some were texting, and some were chatting about their day while others waited for their rides.
  She felt the thin air touched her skin and it was quite cold matched the dark colors that filled the sky and stars that shone their brightest.
She hoped others have seen how that night changed.
  
The engine of the car started, it was time to start the journey back home.
 The streets were busy and crowded.
It was not new to her.
 It was filled with cars, jeepneys, motorcycles, bicycles, buses and people.
There was honking of horns, loud music played by different vehicles and barkers shouting as loud as they can in hopes of finding passengers ready to go back home.
 
Roxas Avenue was the same as every night.
It was crowded with vendors and their different products.
 It was luminous and appealing to different kinds of people: students, family, lovers or group of friends.
  Aside from the variety of products and colors displayed which are pleasing to the eyes, this street offered a lot of products needed for her survival as a student.
  
The smell of the cooked street food, she remembered spending most of her time at this street, especially after night class when she can no longer control her hunger.
The bright and orange kwek-kwek, the green sides like cucumber.
The smell of fried isaw, proven, adidas, helmet and other chicken parts dipped into sweet red sauce with a little kick of spice and acidity.
  
The aroma of meat burnt in charcoal, barbecue-style was also her favorite and usually paired with sticky rice.
Most of the time it was the reason she survived as a student because it filled her stomach like no any other kind of food could.
  The memories made her hungry, and then they turned right to Quimpo Boulevard.
A busy street also but was very calm at that night.
Nothing was out of the ordinary then she looked at a jeepney full of sleepy and tired passengers.
  
A student, teacher, worker, men, women even a child, she gazed at them and saw nothing but need to go home but it was a long way.
  A lamp post, a man, road and cars repeat.
She thought of what she could write in her article due for tomorrow.
There were a lot of things that she observed that night, information overload.
She was enjoying the ride, the breeze, sceneries and felt comfortable.
Then she drifted, drifted into a sleep for it was a long way.
  
Honking of horns, sudden breaks and the smell of dark smokes from vehicles woke her up from her nap.
It was traffic.
She knew then that they have reached Matina, a place near home.
  It was bright and filled with lights from the different establishments though the smell of fish from the public market filled her nose.

It was awful but she was excited because she2019s almost there, to the place where she can finally lay down and rest, her home.
  Then, they reached home.
It was peaceful and everyone was asleep.
Another day has passed, just how fast the night changes.

Tomorrow is a new day for her, a new day to appreciate what was going on around her.

A chance for her to take it slow.

-o0o-  
Noli-an is an AB Mass Communications student of Ateneo de Davao University
Earn it , Earn it TODAY2019S generation has been more about the numbers of likes a selfie gets on Facebook, the number of views a video has on YouTube, and the number of favorites a tweet makes on Twitter, that sometimes others tend to forget to think before they click.
As long as something appears to be interesting to many, it doesn2019t matter anymore how it would seem to some.

A perfect example of this would be girls complaining about being offended after posting pictures of them wearing bikinis online.
It is with no doubt that this could help them earn hundreds of likes, even thousands, but that doesn2019t mean they are safe from what others might think of.
 
Yes, this is a free country.
We are allowed to express ourselves and be whoever we want to be.
But are we really looking at the bigger picture here? If, in the first place, they didn2019t want to earn negative comments, maybe they should2019ve been more careful and thoughtful before they posted attention-seeking images of them.
They want to be respected but they do things that earn disrespect.
 
Respect is really earned.
It is never given.
If you want people to give you positive feedbacks, maybe you should start portraying yourself as someone who deserves respect.
You can2019t just walk around and tell people to respect you as you do something that do not seem to be appropriate for them.
How can others respect you if you, yourself, do not respect you? It is as easy as that.
 
So as much as possible, before hitting that post button, think twice or even more times.
Think whether this could or could not ruin your image.
Weigh things heavily.
Filter your desired posts.
At the end of the day, it2019s not always the number of likes that matters most but the amount of respect you would earn.

-o0o- 
Julie Jean is an AB Mass Communications student of Ateneo de Davao University
On letting go and becoming a shoreline, On letting go and becoming a shorelineOUR professor told us that most of the hours she allots in cleaning her large office are consumed through reading the exam papers of her former students2026 before throwing them away.
 
She admitted that she was fond of keeping things she did not really need, thinking that she might need it sooner.
That was why she kept exam papers.
But when she realized that those sheets of paper cannot be recycled given their condition, she decided to throw them in the garbage bin.
Before disposing them, however, she made sure that she scanned the papers for the last time, making her recall the owner of the paper and the memories she shared with him or her.
Then, when this was done, she finally let go.
 I, myself, was an unapologetic keeper of all things which I thought I needed: from clutch pins to old, worn elementary books.
Like my teacher, a part of me believed that something about them was worth keeping.
I was very much aware, however, that I would less likely to use those things.
Yet, I kept them still, like what I did with people.

I used to keep people close to me.
It was a long, unforgettable process: you have to get to know them, make friends with them, eat with them almost every lunch, give them books before Christmas breaks, have an overload of sleepovers, argue with them, laugh with them, drink with them.
Then I got too attached that sometimes I would thought my world revolved around them.
It was when I reached Third Year College that I realized I started treating them not as my friends but as my possessions 2013 like how I treat remarkable clutch pins and old, worn elementary books.
 
When some of the people I got used being with changed the way they treated me, it made me realize that I had no control over them2026 and will never have.
People are not something we contain in a box and expect to stay there forever.
 Cheesy as it sounds, but undeniably true, they are waves in the sea that cannot stay in the shoreline but, from time to time, come back carrying different intensities.
But the waves that kiss the shoreline might not be the same waves that abandon it.
 
I realized I am the shoreline.
I have to watch them leave while taking parts of me.
I can wait for them to come back but should never expect for them to.
 I have disposed the things which I used to keep.
Rusts were already all over the clutch pins.
And the worn elementary book had nothing but outdated information.

I was wrong: I no longer need them.
I have to empty the box sometimes to let new things fill it.
I had to stop eating lunch with people who do not want to eat lunch with me.
I have to stop laughing with people who do not find happiness in my company.
I have to recognize that the tighter I grip, the more it hurts my knuckles.
I have to let go.
I should be the shoreline.
 I have to be the shoreline.

-o0o- 
Reil Benedict is a BS in Education student of Ateneo de Davao University
Celebrating Canada Day, Celebrating Canada Day
Main photo has Ambassador Neil Reeder with Hany Constantin of Constant Integrated Project Development, Arch.
Daniel Lim of Fareast Associates, Bobby Orig of Aboitiz Power/CanCham Mindanao Advisory Committee;  Ambassador Neil Reeder, Robertino Pizarro of A Brown Company, Inc., Leonilo Claudio, Davao Fresh Foods Corp./CanCham 3rd VP Board of Trustees.
Stella A.
Estremera, CANADA turned 148 years old last July 1.
In the past, Davao City wouldn2019t know any better, nor would it have anything to mark such day.
But not when Davao is brimming with economic prospects buoyed by the prospect of Mindanao finally putting an end to the decades-long Bangsamoro confict.
 
Thus, last July 2 Davao City welcomed Ambassador of Canada to the Philippines Neil Reader in a special dinner event held at Seda Abreeza in Bajada.
True enough, the Ambassador Reader talked of the greater interest in Davao and Mindanao although admitting that this will all depend on how government can sustain the peace.
Earlier, the Canadian Minster of Trade Ed Fast and Senator Tobias Enverga Sr.
led a trade mission in Manila and Cebu, Mindanao obviously excluded.
That is because of peace concerns.

"Our actions towards doing a trade mission here in Mindanao depends on the progress of the peace process in the island," Reeder said during the special dinner.
 But he is optimistic of Canada having greater trade exchanges with the Philippines with a free trade agreement between the two countries.
He said a similar line when attending the opening of the 2015 Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Expo last July 3 at the Abreeza Atrium participated by 30 exhibitors.
 
201cWe expect Canadian investments to increase with the passage of the BBL .
We continue to support the Bangsamoro peace process and all efforts to implement a comprehensive agreement,201d Reader said.

He also lauded the start of the decommissioning process, which was marked with a ceremonial surrender of 75 high-powered firearms by the Moro Islamic Liberation Front  last June 16 at the old provincial capitol in Sultan Kudarat, Maguindanao.
The decommissioning program is part of the Annex on Normalization of the Comprehensive Agreement on the Bangsamoro , which indicates that the group's arms and forces will be put beyond use and their members will be assisted to return to civilian lives.

201cThe start of the decommissioning process demonstrates the willingness of both sides to pave the way forward for lasting peace and stability, development and long-term economic prosperity for the people of southern Philippines and all Filipinos who have endured decades of conflict,201d Reader said.

The Canadian government has been working closely with the GRP and MILF peace panels.
That Sn\xfcbear something, That Sn\xfcbear something
THIS IS SN\xdcBEAR.
Turning oft-ignored everyday subtleties or anecdotal situations into something that lingers, Sn\xfcbear writes awesome songs and plays them just as beautifully, the way they did during their album launch at The Monastery last June 27.

EASY-LISTENING tunes, thought-provoking lyrics, and a sound that could only be classified as their own, Sn\xfcbear takes us to a trance as they get us hooked by the first guitar riff.
Each of their songs has a story to deliver, enjoyed only in the listener2019s mind.
It2019s a sound trip that2019s hard not to like.
Composed of Kim 201cAian201d Tiangco , Bobby Olvido , Miguel Saballa , Jud Sala , Jeremie Lim , Isser Libres , Dan Soco  and Paolo dela Victoria , the band was formed back in 2013 when they first graced the Cebuano audience with their music at the album launching of their sister band, Honeydrop.
Read more.
Takes from San Diego Comic-Con, Takes from San Diego Comic-ConRoark L.
Masbad, Wacky Tech, I2019M A comic fan.
I read both Marvel and DC.
I don2019t claim to be full-on geek about both universes but I know enough.
And every year, I dream of attending the San Diego Comic-Con .
My 201cwant" to be there has skyrocketed lately primarily because the comic book universes have started to come alive in the big screen.
We2019ve seen the X-Men, the Avengers, the Guardians of the Galaxy, Batman, Superman, and a slew of other characters.

It would just be heavenly to be in a conference that talks about nothing but.

Oh, and there2019s Star Wars too.

So this week, please allow me indulge a bit on a couple of matters from SDCC.
One, the brand new Batman vs.
Superman: Dawn of Justice trailer.
And two, the posters for the live action movie adaptation of Warcraft.

Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice - Comic-Con Trailer HD

Warcraft
Source: http://screenrant.com/warcraft-movie-logo-posters-anduin-durotan/






Oh, one last thing.
The Joker is coming back.
1st Philippine eagle nest in Luzon sighted, 1st Philippine eagle nest in Luzon sighted
A mother Philippine Eagle feeding her one-month-old chick on the eagle nest in Apayao.

IN JULY of 1896, a local Samare\xf1o acting as guide to British Ornithologist John Whitehead brought back to camp one of the largest forest birds that Whitehead has ever seen.

Then a new species to the western world, this first Philippine eagle specimen from Samar was a jewel among Whitehead's wildlife collections.
It was then one of the world's greatest discoveries for a biological expedition.
     
One hundred nineteen years later today, the same spirit of scientific discovery is celebrated as the Philippine Eagle Foundation  announces another first in the history of Philippine Eagle research and conservation -- the discovery of the first ever active Philippine Eagle nest on Luzon Island.
    
The first Philippine Eagle nest on Luzon with a downy chick was finally located by Philippine Eagle Foundation  biologists and Isnag research assistants in the lush lowland forests of Apayao Province in the Cordillera Administrative Region of Luzon last April 24.
Finding the elusive nest involved a total of 3,456 hours of observations, which is equivalent to watching television 24/7 for over three months straight.
 
Field work spanned five years in rugged and remote jungles.
In the field, observers spent time mostly on platforms atop trees, scanning ridges and valleys for the highly secretive national bird.
 
"In the thick lowland jungles of Apayao, finding an eagle nest is like searching for a needle in a pile of hay," said PEF Biologist and expedition team leader Tatiana Aba\xf1o.

They kept seeing the eagles during four consecutive years of summer field work, but no hints of a nest.
Not until this year.
  
On a clear day in April 21, a bird carrying a decapitated prey took a long, diagonal dive towards a huge tree.
Nearby, another eagle on a perch was also spotted.
Together, these observations indicate nesting.
  
A meticulous nest search followed.
For three days, additional eagle sightings helped the team home in on the nest.
After climbing 15 different trees around the spot where the eagles repeatedly emerged and disappeared, the nest tree was finally singled out.
And on the center of the sturdy nest bowl was a month-old eagle chick dozing off.
   
"New information generated from observing the newly discovered nest will definitely bring eagle conservation in Luzon to the next level" said Dr.
Theresa Mundita Lim, director of Biodiversity Management Bureau  of the Department of Environment and Natural Resources .
 
The PEF works with the BMB in securing the few remaining eagle pairs across the archipelago.
Three reasons make the nest discovery important.
First, this active nest allows a detailed study of the behavior of eagles in Luzon.
The island's flora and fauna and its climate pattern are very different from the other three islands -- Leyte, Samar and Mindanao -- where eagles are also found.
 
A unique environment leads to new habits and lifestyles.
Close observations of nesting adults and their young give researchers the opportunity to understand and explain how distinctive Luzon eagles are from the rest.
Second, the nest is the eagle's center of activity.

For a bird that occupies a large territory, it is only when eagles breed that one can carry out a focused and detailed study of its behavior and food needs.
 Last, eagles are also very loyal to the places where they nest; they use the same set of nests repeatedly.

Maintaining the health and integrity of nest sites therefore ensure reproduction and the perpetuity of their kind.
Knowing where nests occur also helps conservationists protect nesting territories better.
Eagles become sedentary and tied to a particular place only when nesting.

Breeding birds therefore become vulnerable if nests are unprotected.
Fortunately, the eagles of Apayao are secured through an Indigenous habitat conservation scheme.

The town of Calanasan, in particular, is leading the way.
Through the ancient Isnag observance of Lapat, forest habitats were set aside as "taboo" or "sacred sites" where logging, mining, farming and wildlife hunting are completely banned.
  
Rooted in culture and religious tradition, the adoption of lapat has set aside forests as Indigenous "protected areas."  
"The presence of nesting eagles within Calanasan's lapat areas is a strong proof that the Isnag way of protection is resulting to clear biodiversity conservation outcomes," said Elias K.
Bulut Sr., mayor of Calanasan and staunch supporter of Philippine eagle conservation in Apayao.

In 2010, he penned a town ordinance that sets aside 25,000 hectares of forest as lapat.
Right after the nest was found, PEF, DENR and the LGUs of Calanasan and Apayao renewed research and protection of the nesting eagles and it's young.
The PEF held public education outreach and conservation planning with funding from the San Roque Power Corporation .
SRPC has been supporting eagle surveys across the Cordillera since 2011.

"We are glad we invested on this very important initiative.
We are very proud that our support has not only helped the PEF advance its work in Luzon but is also benefiting the Cordillera region's biodiversity conservation program.
 We encourage everyone who has a stake in the Cordillera to also invest on our national bird," said SRPC President Kenshi Iseri.
In 2014, the Philippine Tropical Forest Conservation Foundation  began providing small grants to support further eagle conservation work in the area.
A food habits and nesting behavior study also began in May and will end in August once the young flies off the nest.
The result so far is a collection of pioneering information on Luzon eagles' diet and demeanor.
 
For example, the latest tally show that a total of 38 animals belonging to five species of mammals, three species of snake, a huge lizard and a large bird were fed by the eagle parents to the growing young.
At an average feeding rate of one prey every other day, the young appeared well-fed and healthy.
The timing of nesting and the ways the Apayao adult eagles behave when breeding also differed slightly with the eagles found in Mindanao.
The PEF currently knows of 35 wild eagle pairs on Mindanao.
"What our biologists are seeing and recording are precious pieces of biological information," said Dennis Salvador, Philippine Eagle Foundation Executive Director.
"For over a hundred years, knowledge about the ecology of Luzon eagles was, at best, speculative.
Now we are slowly gathering solid scientific evidence which can help bring about informed conservation actions," Salvador added.
Today, the whole Cordillera Administrative Region is celebrating its Founding Day anniversary and the province of Apayao is hosting this year's festivities.
As host to the world's first active nest in Luzon, the public announcement of this landmark discovery is one of the highlights of its biodiversity forum.
Elias Bulut Jr., governor of the Province of Apayao, is equally delighted of the nest discovery.
"We are very proud to host a nest site and several more pairs of the Great Philippine Eagle in our own backyard," he said.
"As a fellow Filipino and resident of Apayao, we will help secure the eagle's safety so future generations of Iya Apayao can still enjoy its magnificence."
The Philippine Eagle is a large forest eagle which is found only in the Philippines where it is the national bird.
No more than 400 pairs exist in what's left of tropical forests on the islands of Luzon, Leyte, Samar and Mindanao.
 The species is an IUCN "critically endangered" species.
Jayson C.
Iba\xf1ez
When poetry meets film , When poetry meets film 
THE TEAM.
Liryc with his team for "Sa Pagitan ng Pagdalaw at Paglimot" nominated for Locarno Film Festival's Pardi di Domani: 15-year-old cinematographer Jiro Garbes, producer and production manager Alex Poblete, actress Tin Velasco, and production manager Joel Griffiths, and a scene from the short film .
At right is Liryc showing off his old Samsung Note 2, which he used to video part of the film.
Stella A.
Estremera, IF AFTER watching Liryc Paolo dela Cruz2019s film you feel like there2019s something poetic about it, don2019t be surprised because it2019s based on a poem.
 
201cBefore ako gumagawa ng film, gumagawa ako ng tula.
Ang mga images sa film binabagay ko sa tula,201d Liryc says of his art.

The poetry must have been detected by pioneering independent film producer Kidlat Tahimik  when the artist recognized him with the Bamboo Camera Award in 2008 for his film Tundong during the Mindanao Film Festival.

That was his first foray into film after attending the Guerilla Filmmaking Workshop, the workshop that precedes the local filmfest to gather participants who hold some promise.
He was in second year college then.
 
Locarno Film Festival
At 23 and on his third year taking up AB Mass Communications at the Ateneo de Davao University he is one of only two Filipino independent filmmakers whose films have been selected as part of the official line-up under the Pardi di Domani of the 68th Locarno Film Festival in Switzerland from August 5-15, 2015.
The other one is Carlo Francisco Manatad2019s 201c/7410u| Liryc with team nilyn Has201d, which tells the story of a nightclub dancer who had to temporarily take a break during the visit of Pope Francis.
 
Pardi di Domani is a section in the festival that showcases future talents of World Cinema.
Liryc2019s entry is his short film 201cSa Pagitan ng Pagdalaw at Paglimot 201d.
With barely a month left, however, Liryc still has to raise enough funds to make it to Switzerland, and here2019s to hoping that this story can crowdsource his ticket to his dream.
Locarno is among the major international film festivals on the level of Cannes, Venice, and Berlin.
  
A homecoming
What came between 2008, when he received the Bamboo Camera from Kidlat Tahimik and 2015, when he is back in school? He pursued his dream of making films and learned the craft and the hardships from the icons of the industry, among them master filmmaker Lav Diaz , whom he worked closely with for two and a half years.
Learned the ropes of casting in Regal productions and got guidance on film finance from Kristine Kintana, and managed to save some from regular work in reality shows at TV5 enough to go home and fulfill a promise.
His return to school is to fulfill his promise to his father to finish his studies.

His father died a few years back.
It was in his father2019s VHS shop in Tupi, South Cotabato when he first appreciated films as a child.
The temporary break in full-time work in filmmaking is a necessary sacrifice.
That does not mean he will take a break from filmmaking, anyway.
AN OLD 
Samsung Note 2
Part of his competing film was shot using his Samsung Note 2, a very old one with crack on the screen.
This is the part when he filmed what is described in the film credits as the 201cBabae sa Eroplano201d, the scene that inspired the whole story.
He was with his mentor ADDU Prof.
Hadji Balajadia on a flight to Manila at that time.

201cSa unahan namin, may babaeng sobrang amazed sa nakikita niya, kumakaway pa.
Tapos yung kasama nung babae parang tinuturuan pa siya, 2018O, ano, nakapaglipstick ka na ba?2019 Yung ganun,201d he said in an interview at the Sun.Star office.

201cNalulungkot ako sa image, siguro yun ang unang sakay niya sa eroplano, tapos yung you2019re taking a last photo of your country,201d he said.

201cMinsan, bagong tao ka na pagdating mo sa ibang bayan.
Siguro gagawin mo lahat para masalba mo ang pamilya mo sa kahirapan.
Malungkot yun.
Hindi natin alam baka minor pa siya.
Pumapasok ka sa dimension na walang kasiguraduhan.201d  
Just an exercise
But he did not produce the film out of this scene expecting to win any awards.
In fact, he made the film as an exercise.
His team includes a 15-year-old videographer Jiro Garbes, who along with Joel Griffiths from De La Salle University who is the film2019s production manager, he met in a film camp.

His main actor, Tin Velasco, he just met less than an hour before they started filming in Pampanga, recommended by one of his companions while taking breakfast in McDonald2019s already somewhere in Pampanga.
This companion could not even say for sure if Tin knew how to act.

201cDapat kasing huwag masyadong seryoso pag gumagawa ng pelikula,201d he said.
With the same nonchalance, he submitted the film as entry to the Locarno just for the sake of submitting.
Taking the phrase 201cwala lang201d to a new level.
Thus, when he received the notification, he literally stumbled to the ground.
It was 8 p.m.
and he was walking home from school.
The first person he broke the news to was Prof.
Balajadia, who is the film2019s associate producer, and they stayed up till 4 a.m.
still not believing.

201cSi Sir Hadji wala nang nagawa kungdi magtititili,201d he recalled.
 
Home is where the stories are
Liryc is excited to explore his hometown Tupi, which he describes as a place that has many stories to tell.
His town is also known for its focus on the arts, in fact, the Tupi National High School has been a consistent winner in Kadayawan Festival2019s Indak-indak, and it is where Liryc as a young boy learned the basics of story-telling.
In fourth year, he produced a documentary as a mini-thesis in school on rebels in a village, without even realizing that he and his groupmates were entering a dangerous zone.

201cStory is king.
Sa technical, hindi kasi ako technical na tao, ang mas importante talaga ang istorya,201d he said.
Here2019s to hoping that Liryc makes it to Locarno in August.
You can email him through lirycpaolodelacruz@gmail.com.

A stirring sweetness, A stirring sweetness
WHERE THE MAGIC BEGINS.
All this ice cream goodness starts in Alyssa Lao2019s kitchen.
Inset: Blueberry Bread Pudding and Nutty Business are just two of Scoops by Edrea2019s most sought after flavors.
IT all started with a craving, and she ended up with a business that satisfies every intense desire 2014 for ice cream, that is.
Alyssa Lao was craving for one of her favorite ice cream flavors 2014 salted caramel 2014 four years ago.
She just got back home in Cebu, but her favorite salted caramel ice cream was in a Sunday market in Manila.
So Alyssa did the next best thing: make her own ice cream.
More about Alyssa's story in July 19, 2015 issue of Sun.Star Weekend.
The rough road back, The rough road back
DAVAO.
At 21, Ana Luisa Calix already wanted to leave the world of a prostituted woman, but it is never that easy.
The photos above show some of the girls of LawigBubay in a workshop.

Stella A.
Estremera, YOU2019D see her whenever there are activities about women and children rights, especially when it comes to prostitution.

She2019s been there and she2019s trying to help the new ones see a way out.
It2019s not easy, but she2019s trying.
The recent graduation of her son in a maritime course was a beam of hope in the dark world of the prostituted.
Yes, it can be done.
Just resolve never to go back.
Ana Luisa 201cAnalou201d Napone Calix2019s life story is one that can put full-length sob films to shame.
Raped at 14, prostituted at 16, pretending to be the sister of her son for years, until the whole complex situation was finally revealed as the son was well into becoming an adult.

201cNung na buntis ako, bata pa ako, buntis rin ang nanayko,201d she said.
Dirt poor with not much to raise another child, the mother gave up hers and then raised Analou2019s son as hers.

Yes, it2019s that complicated.
I had to probe further to understand.
Let it be said that the details need not be known by all.
Living in the slums of Sasa right outside the port, her claims of having been raped was brushed off by all except one, the erstwhile barangay captain Cornelio Reta Sr.

201cSiya ra gayud ang nitabang nako ,201d Analou said.
But the odds were still stacked against her, and so through the instigation of her parents, she agreed to an amicable settlement.
201cMay pera kami from the settlement, pero nagkasakit ang stepfather ko at that time,201d she said.

201cAlthough hindi diretsong sinabi ng nanay ko, pero yun bang puslan man nabasa ka na, maligo ka nalang.201d Soon, she joined the 201cakyat-barko,201d the prostituted women and children who climb up ships docked at the port to render sexual services to the crew.
She was organized by Talikala Inc., the non-government organization working with prostituted women and children, when she was 15, but she did not stop the trade.

She also became a bargirl with a bar fine.
She had a child to support, her other only took the role of being called mother, but it was Analou who was working hard for their family, her son alias brother included.
At 21, she had this longing to start a new life.
She started volunteering for Talikala doing just about everything, from typing to errands.

201cGrab all opportunities.
Pati yang Avon, Natasha, pinasok ko yan, malaki ang natulong niyan sa akin,201d she added.
She then became an officer of LawigBubay, the organization created by the prostituted women who have been tapped by Talikala, and she devoted her time reaching out to women and children like her.
Then she left LawigBubay for two years to work at their barangay as an all-around errand girl.

201cMahirap,201d she said, of her resolve to leave her situation.
201cPara yang tattoo na hindi basta-basta ma-erase.201d Thus, she understands when women whom they have already organized and have encouraged to return to the mainstream fall back in.
The resolve to start life anew is a difficult one as the once prostituted will realize that she has been marked for life and that there will never be money as much as she once had even for one night.

In the meantime, Analou is encouraging her son to find a job and hold the final year as a cadet seaman because this will require a large amount.
They will have to save up for it first.

201cGusto ko rin maranasan niya gaano kahirap mag hanap-buhay,201d she added.

She2019s back at Lawig, but this time, just giving guidance to the new ones who are now having to deal with much younger girls at much greater numbers.

201cHindi n aako suited dahil hindi na ako bata,201d she said of organizing the prostituted young.
 
She said that in gatherings of LawigBubay, the ratio will be two-thirds teens, one-third adult.

201cHindi na kami maka-gel sa 14, 16-years-old, lola na kami,201d she added in jest.

Talikala Inc.
executive director Jeanette Laurel-Ampog confirmed the growing number of minors who fall into the trade, adding that they now have very young social workers because even their long years of experience working with the prostituted is not much of a help when dealing with children with a whole different situation and values.
Their most difficult issue these days is that of the young recruiting and pimping the young.

201cYou can2019t just condemn the pimps because they are children too, you have to help,201d she said.

201cTapos sasabihan ka pa nila hindi man yun bugaw, referrals man yun.201d Then, there are the young who sustain a whole family plus their partners, who do nothing but partake of their earnings.

201cSophisticated na masyado ang issues ng mga bata, may mga strategies na dapat mag-evolve at suriin kung appropriate pa ba ang mga ganitong interventions.
It2019s now a balance of protecting the child and at the same correcting her ways,201d she said, 201ckasi kung pabayaan natin, we will be making it worse.201d 
But they2019re not giving up and still are out there convincing the children to go back to school, and helping them along the way to stay in school.

201cHindi rin natin masisisi ang mga bata dahil ganyan ang kanilang kinalakhan,201d she said.

They celebrate every small success they make, knowing that the odds are growing faster than this small 28-year-old organization can.
And among the good news they are giddy is that they were able to bring back five girls to school 2013 two attending regular schools, and three enrolled in the alternative learning system .

There is hope, even if most of the time it2019s just flickering.
Now, if only more people can pitch in and help.
Sun.Star opens Carcar branch, Sun.Star opens Carcar branch
Fourth Office.\xa0Sun.Star Publishing Inc.
opens its fourth office in Cebu at Gaisano Grand Mall in Carcar City, with a blessing and ribbon-cutting ceremony.
In photo are  Bayani Garcia, Carcar Vice Mayor Patrick Barcenas, Mayor Nicepuro Apura, Sun.Star Chairman Atty.
Sonny Garcia, Gina Atienza, Armi Garcia, Girlie Veloso and Fr.
Bobby Ebisa.\xa0
Jeandie O.
Galolo, SUN.STAR Publishing Inc., the company behind Sun.Star Cebu, Superbalita, www.sunstar.com.ph and Bisdak Magasin, has expanded its presence to Carcar City.
Sun.Star officials led the opening of a 50-square-meter office in Gaisano Grand Mall Carcar yesterday.
The new office extends its advertising, marketing and circulation services to its clients and readers in the south.
Sun.Star Chairman Atty.
Sonny Garcia said the expansion was done to better serve readers in the south.
201cCarcar is a booming city, therefore, it has a need for news and information.
We believe that we have a lot of news consumers and also contributors to the news here,201d said Garcia in an interview.
To further boost its circulation in the south, Sun.Star deployed 25 newsboys in the city.
Girlie Veloso, Sun.Star Carcar branch head, said the new office has initially performed well, exceeding its daily quota for circulation.
Garcia said he is hoping that the new office will sustain its early performance.
The idea to open a Carcar branch was conceptualized 10 years ago, Garcia recalled, but it is only now that the company pushed through with it seeing the increasing traffic and business activities in the area.
While it chose Carcar to be its newest location, Garcia, however, said that the circulation and news coverage will further extend even to the southernmost towns of Cebu.
 
Presently, Sun.Star Cebu uses its pool of current reporters to cover the south, primarily printed on its South Plus page.
Sun.Star Carcar is the fourth Sun.Star office in Cebu, after the main office on P.
Del Rosario St.
and other branches in Fuente Osme\xf1a  and Mandaue City.
Garcia said that at 32, Sun.Star is also working to boost its digital presence, primarily through the Sun.Star Network Exchange.
He said the management will meet next month to further discuss digital matters.
Presently, there are no immediate plans to open another branch.
But Garcia said that if the Carcar branch continuously performs well, it might consider opening
one in northern Cebu.
Carcar City Mayor Nicepuro Apura was grateful to Sun.Star for choosing the city as its new location.
He assured that the growing economy of Carcar will be supportive of the growth Sun.Star is anticipating from this thriving city.
5 rules of proper 2018netiquette2019, 5 rules of proper 2018netiquette2019THE Internet is filled with opportunities to explore, create and collaborate.
But to make the most of these opportunities, it2019s important to keep the web safe and secure.
This task is a shared responsibility among every netizen.
Learning Internet etiquette or "netiquette" is the first step in helping promote a safe and friendly online environment.
When you keep yourself safe and secure online, you minimize the power of cybercrime, which includes identity theft, information theft, and even cyber-bullying.
Here are five key things to remember when navigating the World Wide Web:
1.
Download with caution.
One of the most wonderful things about the Internet is the vast amount of content it offers; we can find just about anything online if we look hard enough.
While some of the things we come across are so awesome that we want to be able to access them while we2019re offline, we have to be cautious when it comes to downloading.
Only download from credible and trusted sources.
Sometimes it2019s not the things that we find that we have to be careful about, but the things that come to us.
Be wary of opening or downloading email attachments even if it2019s from someone you know, and especially if it isn2019t something you expect to be receiving.
Double check that the email address is from the reputable source it may claim to be from and that the content does not look suspicious.
2.
Safeguard delicate information.
There are so many ways our over sharing can leave us vulnerable to identity or information theft.
Aside from creating strong passwords, keep usernames, account numbers, and any sort of information that could be used to verify your identity, safe.
Think before you tweet your dog2019s name if it2019s a security question on any of your accounts -- or better yet, opt for more reliable methods of authentication, such as 2-step verification codes or back-up email addresses.
3.
Don2019t contribute to spreading false or hurtful information.
We2019ve all fallen victim to believing -- or at least coming close to believing -- a viral hoax.
Just as gossip or juicy stories spread like wildfire offline, it can do so at an even greater scale online.
And it doesn2019t have to be hurtful to be harmful, either.
Employ a healthy skepticism with anything you hear or see online, and do some fact checking before you share.
4.
Act courteously, even in anonymity.
Remember, the Golden Rule or the universal ethical code to "treat others as you would like to be treated" also applies on the Internet.
Be kind and courteous.
The use of tormenting, harassing or humiliating language is as real and as damaging online as they are face-to-face.
Appropriate language is not only necessary in formal letters, but also in day-to-day chats on social media.
5.
Flag or report inappropriate content.
Online communities often rely on users to generate content and flag ones that violate community guidelines.
In the case of YouTube, with more than 300 hours of videos being uploaded every minute, flagging or reporting questionable content is invaluable to preserving it as a safe and enjoyable resource, just as in most online communities.
If you come across content that you think shouldn2019t be there, report it.
These are only the basics of proper netiquette.
The Internet is always evolving, so it2019s important to maintain an up-to-date understanding of how to stay safe and secure online.
Share these five rules of netiquette with your friends and family to help promote an enjoyable and useful Internet for all.
If you are interested in taking a more active role as a positive force online, look up Google2019s Web Rangers program on https://www.webrangers.ph.

Esca\xf1o clan reunion on July 30 to August 2, Esca\xf1o clan reunion on July 30 to August 2Once again, the large Esca\xf1o clan is gathering for a fun-filled four-day reunion event, hosted by the Mamerto line branch.
Dr.
Mamerto Esca\xf1o was one of the eldest sons of Don Fernando Esca\xf1o, patriarch of the Esca\xf1o Family.
The family will be celebrating its 8th Grand Reunion on July 30 to August 2, 2015.
 This family tradition started in 1987 was spearheaded by Nito Sala, Loren Esca\xf1o, Cheling Sala, Angel "Boy" Veloso, Jimmy Esca\xf1o, Michel Lhuillier, Petit Garcia, Maia Franco, and the late Paul Evangelista and Pet Esca\xf1o-Misa.

Complete Schedule of Activities:
July 30 @ 6 p.m.: Family Exhibit, showcasing old family photographs, artwork, paintings and even family heirlooms at 856 Gallery in AS Fortuna.
Cocktails will be served.
Also, relaunching of the Esca\xf1o coffee table book entitled "Esca\xf1o: A Family Portrait" written by the famous Filipino Historian, Resil Mojares.
The author himself will be there to sign copies of the book, which will be sold at P1,500.
Don Mamerto, an avid photography buff has had many famous and historic black & white photos that he had taken over the years from the 1930s until the 1960s which will also be showcased during the exhibit.
In honor of his legacy, we will also have a Photography Contest which is open to all family members who wish to share their talent in the art of photography.
In this event, on the day of her 2nd death anniversary, we will also be honoring the memory of Pet Esca\xf1o-Misa of the Mamerto line, for her leadership and extensive contribution as one of the officers of Fundacion Esca\xf1o.
Pet was the heart and force of our past family reunions and was a major contributor in the extensive research and gathering of all materials for the first Esca\xf1o book published in 1988, as well as, the newest coffee table book published in 2013.

July 31 @ 7 a.m.: Golf Tournament, Cebu Country Club, Banilad
July 31 @ 6 p.m.: Welcome Cocktails, Registration and Sing-Along at Don Merto's Casa Esca\xf1o, Juana Osme\xf1a St.

August 1 @ 9 a.m.: VECO Tour , inclusive of lunch.
Meet at VECO Office, Old Banilad Road;
Tennis Tournament, Cebu Country Club
August 1 @ 6 p.m.: Holy Mass, Dinner & Show at Oakridge Horizons, Oakridge Business Park, AS Fortuna.
The presentation for this reunion's theme is "Ayer, Karun, Tomorrow" choreographed by Val & Ophelia San Diego.
The memory of our beloved family members who have passed on since the last reunion in 2012 will also be remembered.
August 2 @ 10 a.m.: Family Day Picnic at Las Palmas, Danao, the family resort owned by Michel & Amparito Lhuillier.
Updates of the reunion will be posted regularly on our website at www.escanoreunion.com.
Tickets to the main events are at P2,500 and available at Don Merto's, The Suite Room in Ayala, and Destinations Specialist in BTC.
Children under 12 pay only P500.00.

Her own way to serve, Her own way to serveNelson C.
Bagaforo, HER charisma and makamasa traits could have easily catapulted her to power, at least in Tagum City where they are a prominent political clan.
But politics isn't her cup of tea.
Emerald "Adi" Uy has her own way to serve, which she said "doesn't need to be in power," unlike her father Rey Uy, who was an undefeated city mayor for nine years, and her brother Oyo, who used to serve as the city's No.
1 councilor.
"Samok, wala'y privacy" is her definition of politics.

Just like her mother, Alma Uy, a successful businesswoman who has also been actively involved in the promotion of Davao's tourism, Emerald prefers to put her hands in business, which she believes is also a very effective way in serving the community.
So when the offer from her parents came to establish a food business in her hometown in Tagum, she gladly accepted it without second thoughts, considering the fact that cooking has been her passion since she was a young girl.
In fact, after graduation from high school, she went to the United States to study Culinary Arts at Culinary Institute of America in Hyde Park, New York.
She was in Singapore, where she just finished a crash course on pastry making at Sunrice Globalchef Academy, when the offer to do business in Tagum came.
She was then planning to stay in that country to work and hone further her skills in baking and cooking.
But for Emerald, putting up a food business is a realization of her dream to also serve.

She said her food business -- which she named YuYu Cafe and Dessert Shop -- is a manifestation that she also cares for Tagumenos whom she promised to provide quality food at affordable cost.

At the start, she observed that Tagumenos appeared not ready yet for "just a coffee shop," a reason she includes in her menu a selection of rice meals to address demand of her prospective market.
"I offer food I learned to cook while studying in the US.
It was my desire to let my kababayans try what I have learned," she says.
Other than coffee, pastries and meals, YuYu also offers sandwiches, pastas and pizzas.
True enough, after five years since she opened the business, YuYu has become synonymous to Tagum City -- a must place to visit not just for Tagumenos, but for those who are visiting the place, which is now becoming one of the fastest growing city in the country today.
One proof of Yuyu's success is its expansion three years after it opened in 2010 at a small place along the city's National Highway.
In 2013, it has moved to a bigger location, also on National Highway to accommodate its growing market.
"This is much bigger.
Four times bigger than our original place.
We have to transfer, because surprisingly the business is doing very well.
Our market continues to grow," Emerald said.
Also, she was proud to say that from the original eight employees, the cafe's manpower has grown to 20.
"This is also one way of serving the community, to provide jobs and to train interested Tagumenos how to cook and bake," Emerald said.
With her loyal crew and her strict, but tender supervision, Emerald says they have won the hearts of Tagumenos whom they continue to serve food they can afford without sacrificing its quality.

"If you look at our prices, our coffee is much cheaper than any other coffee shops in the city.
All our cakes are less than a hundred bucks.
For our sandwiches the most expensive is at P100.
If we go beyond that magre-react talaga ang market," the 27-year-old entrepreneur says.
"I see to it na ang quality ng food andun.
I take charge of the kitchen.
I only have assistants but I personally prepare almost everything." 
"Okay naman ang market but there are some who really have to think twice bago pumasok dito.
Kaya when we did the menu, we controlled the prices kahit na hindi mataas ang mark up," she adds.
Emerald also trusts her 20-man crew whom she credits for the success of her business.
"I always told them to just love their work, like I do.
I can now entrust the business to them everytime I'm out on a trip abroad," she says.
Besides, she has provided her crew with the right training -- everything that she learned in school.
"They can copy my recipes.
Kase ako, I really don't believe that there is a secret recipe.
The secret is always on your passion to do it, the techniques and the ingredients that you are using," she stresses.
Korean BBQ at light prices  , Korean BBQ at light prices  BULGOGI Brothers is giving its guests something to please both the palate and the pocket with its reasonably-priced selections of prime quality meats and all-time favorite dishes served in portions that two can share.
Popular for its authentic Korean cuisine, the restaurant is also a major hotspot for a fun Korean barbecue experience where customers can grill meats, make their own ssam  and indulge in some seriously delicious Korean specialties.
 
Bulgogi Brothers' new prices make the experience even more enticing, featuring a full menu of Smokin' Korean BBQ entrees that have been re-portioned and offered at affordable price points to cater to a wider, Korean food-loving crowd.

"Now, more diners can enjoy our barbecue offerings as we re-portioned the sizes of the meat, making them more affordable," explained The Bistro Group AVP for marketing Lisa Ronquillo.
These dishes use the same top quality meats the restaurant is known to serve in all of its branches ensuring customers the best value for their money.

Its Premium Rib Eye and Boneless Short Ribs platter, for instance, can now be had for only P995.
Customers who simply want rib eye or all short ribs may order one of each at P595 per portion and wash it down with makguli or bokbunja just like Koreans do.
The special deal also extends to the restaurant2019s signature dishes such as the Bulgogi Brother2019s Special, an assortment of perfectly marbled bulgogi seasoned beautifully for P695; Seoul Style Bulgogi, sliced beef noodles and vegetables simmered in a flavorful broth at P425; and Unyang Style Bulgogi, a famous and tasty dish traditionally served in Korean royal court now made more affordable at P495.

Other dishes to try are the Beef Brisket , Beef Belly BBQ , Beef and Mushroom Bulgogi , Pork Bulgogi , Pork Belly , and Korean Pork Ribs .
And in true Korean tradition, all Korean barbecue dishes are served with a variety of kimchi, dipping sauces, and fresh lettuce to make delicious wraps.

Bulgogi Brothers in Davao City is located at the second level of SM Lanang Premier.
Celebrating Eid'l Fitr, Celebrating Eid'l FitrMUSLIMS in Central Mindanao gathered to celebrate Eid'l Fitr which marked the end of the fasting month of Ramadan last July 17.

Eid'l Fitr, which literally means "festival of breaking the fast" symbolizes faith and gratitude towards Allah for giving them the strength to endure the fasting month of Ramadan.
It is a spiritual thanksgiving observed by the Muslim communities all over the world.

Aside from its religious essence, Eid'l Fitr is celebrated with great excitement.
Muslims exchange gifts, share food and greet their neighbors as a symbol of solidarity within the community.

Sumptuous food and drinks are the highlight of the festivity, and the women in the household play a major part in preparing mouth-watering traditional sweets and delicacies to liven up the feast.

In Cotabato City, different delicacies from different tribes were showcased at mock Cultural Villages built inside the Armm's Office of the Regional Governor's compound.

Two of the featured attractions were the Maguindanaon and the Iranun villages, headed by Armm Tourism Assistant Secretary Shalimar Candao and Armm Tourism Secretary Maritess Maguindra.
The most common recipe during the festival was a Maguindanaon dish called "sinina" usually made from beef or mutton.
Crabs which are bountiful in the province are also part of the traditional food offerings during the celebration.

Families shared their blessings by providing food to everyone who visits their homes.
Of course, Muslim delicacies like dudol , tinagtag , and putrimandi  were present in each household.

According to Maguindra, these delicacies are specially prepared with much time, effort, perseverance, and prayer.

The Cultural Village display will be open to the public until September 2015.

So, if you are interested in experiencing life from the perspective of our Muslim brothers and sisters, you can still head on to Cotabato City where you can see a wide array of arts and food items that are being displayed in the traditional village.

The feminization of a Disney Princess, The feminization of a Disney PrincessIT WAS back in 2013 when I first saw the article about the redesigning of Princess Merida from a spunky, tomboyish princess to a sexy, glittered princess.

This drew fire from people all over the world.
Comments varied from 201cKeep Merida brave201d to 201cMerida was created to break the mold2014to give young girls a better, stronger role model, a more attainable role model, something of substance, not just a pretty face that waits around for romance201d.
The article made me think.
I couldn2019t help but ask, what2019s wrong with a sparkly Merida?
This issue tackles how women at a very young age are affected by society to be stereotypically 201cfemale201d.
They are constantly told2014in both visual and audio aspects2014that they have to be, in the simplest terms, girls.
A sexist society would give the word girl a definition of being pretty, submissive, and helpless.
A girl is someone who always needs help from men.
A girl is someone who cannot think for herself and therefore must rely on men for guidance.

Princess Merida in her new sparkly clothes is viewed as a disadvantage.
Apparently, it would discourage girls from being brave, taking on their own destinies, and choosing their own roles2014simply because redesigned Merida is sexier, and therefore, more unattainable.

Eventually, society believes that this would affect girls mentally believing that all they need is sparkles and glitter to be a female.

Does wearing sparkly clothes mean she wouldn2019t, couldn2019t choose her own fate? Does that mean she wouldn2019t, couldn2019t use her bow and arrows anymore?  Does being fond of glittery things stop a person from taking control of their own lives?
Redesigned Merida actually presents a predicament all girls can relate to2014the quest to be beautiful inside and out.
Merida is strong, yes, brave too, but that doesn2019t mean she can2019t be pretty.
Calling her out on becoming beautiful would just confuse young girls all over the world.
It2019s like a woman is forced to choose between two stereotyped personalities - to be tomboyish, not like girly things but be strong or to be girlish, like girly things but be dumb.

Redesigned Merida abolishes these foolish beliefs.
Redesigned Merida tells girls, yes, it2019s okay.
It2019s okay to be brave, to be strong, and to choose your own life.
At the same time, Merida sends a message that it2019s okay to be beautiful while you2019re at it too.
Realizing all of this, I also saw the other princesses in a new light.
Other Disney Princesses such as Cinderella and Snow White are dismissed as 201cjust a pretty face that waits around for romance201d.
On the other hand, Mulan and Merida are glorified for going against the norms, for being the captains of their ships, the masters of their souls.

Mulan is idolized because she set off to war and defied her father2019s commands despite living in a patriarchal China where women are suffering gender inequality.
Merida is hyped up because she can use a bow and arrow, challenged men, and redefined what it meant to be a princess.

Cinderella was physically and mentally abused by her own family.
She could have rebelled and run away, yet she remained strong and positive.
  Belle was stigmatized by her own town as 201ca beauty but a funny girl201d just because she liked to read.
Yet she did not let that stop her from reading her books.

Jasmine was as deviant as a princess could be in facing her duties.
Prepared for being married off to a prince, Jasmine defied her whole kingdom and married a thief.
 Snow White who was 14 years old and was an orphan, was ordered to be murdered for being beautiful, yet having survived, remained a gentle soul.
Tiana is a woman of color.
Despite her race and gender, she believed that if she worked, she can make her dreams happen.
And she did.
 Ariel sacrificed her beautiful voice for a chance to be human, and despite popular belief, not to be with Eric.

They were abused, stigmatized, and unjustly labelled.
Saying that these brave women are just pretty faces is just another case of what2019s wrong in our society.
 Not all women have to go to wars, to be able to shoot arrows, to not like girly things, to be strong.

Sometimes, to be a woman, all it takes is to face life2019s challenges with grace and an iron will to survive.
Sometimes to be strong means smiling despite the hardships.
Sometimes being strong means sacrifice, working hard, and putting up against the injustices in the world.
Sometimes, really, all it takes is to just be yourself.
Reading the article about Merida really changed me.
It gave me a new outlook on life.
I realized that in our society today, it is hard being a woman.
Society tells us to do this, to be that, and sometimes, we do not even question it.
I realized that I should not listen too much to society.
It2019s okay if I like to read, to dress up in girly outfits, to shoot arrows, to marry a prince, to save China, or to open up a restaurant.
Heck, it2019s okay if I do them all at once.
What matters is that I remember society will not and cannot dictate who I am.
 I am my own person.
I cannot live inside a box.
 In the end, who I want to be, will always be my choice, and my choice alone.

The big 1 8, The big 1 8TURNING 18 is the first great legal milestone in a young person2019s life.
When they wake up on their 18th birthday, the law sees them as adults.

They can vote, buy property, adopt a child, purchase a gun and do lots of things that they could not have done the day before just like purchasing lottery tickets and tobacco products.
Young adults are also held accountable for their own actions and could be sued in court or thrown in jail for crimes they have committed.
They are now also forced to pay taxes if they have jobs.
Aside from the sense of freedom and more opportunities that come with turning 18, it also comes with the responsibilities of adulthood,  However, all I2019ve cared about when I turned 18 is that I am finally able to run away from home and no one can tell me otherwise.
I was beyond ecstatic last November because I2019ve been waiting to become an adult ever since I2019ve heard of the term 2018legal age2019 when I was around 14 or 15.
2018Total freedom, here I come2019 kept my mind preoccupied days before my birthday.
 The day I turned 18 was the happiest day of my life because I am free to do whatever I want, whenever I want.
It was also the moment I started rebelling more up to the point where my parents threatened to kick me out.

This has then become a major problem because when my parents first mentioned the possibility of kicking me out, it became incorporated into every argument that followed either by my parents or by my anticipation of my parents2019 threats.
When I was around 16, I remember that after every heated argument I had with my parents, I would always say 201cJust wait 2018till I2019m 18.201d  Now that I2019m finally 18, it changed to 201cJust wait 2018till I graduate.201d
Funny, isn2019t it?
It2019s just that no matter how much I wanted to go away, I couldn2019t go through with it.
It could be because I am too dependent on them.
I don2019t know how to cook, do the laundry, find money, and I don2019t even know the names of the places or streets in Davao.
Basically, I2019m just a child inside an 18-year-old body.
I have never once experienced having to work or do chores.
That2019s how much I2019ve been pampered all my life.
Imagine the huge disappointment I felt when I realized that.
All those long nights dreaming of living out on my own and making my own choices just vanished into thin air.
I won2019t lie, I may have suffered from acute depression.
Looking forward to my 18th birthday was the one thing that kept me going because I knew that when I become an adult, I can finally have the freedom I so longed for.
Sadly, life is just too cruel.
I may be an adult now but my parents still treat me as a child.
They refuse to allow me to make an increasing number of choices and to reach increasing levels of independence.
So being the silly person I am, I started provoking arguments whether it may be about what to eat for dinner just to rile them up.
I even started again with the whole 2018I2019m running away2019 saga.
It was until one day when my parents have had enough that they sat me down and said the one thing that got through to me.
201cWhy don2019t you focus on something you hope to accomplish as an 18-year-old? Do you just want to be considered as an adult or is independence the only thing you want? If living with us is making you so unhappy, then you may go and live the life you want to live.
We just want our baby girl to be happy again.201d
That2019s when I knew that I had to stop with all these because the truth is I do need them.
I need my parents just as much as I need air.
Thoughts about me living on my own, being in the real world scared the life out of me.
Who knows how long I2019d be able to last out there? I2019d say maybe half a day.
I guess being 18 doesn2019t really mean a thing unless you2019re no longer living under your parents2019 rule, but if you still are, then you are still bound by the rules they set.
This is the story of how I realized that I will never stop needing my parents.
I choose to be by their side today and forevermore.
So I learned that we should always be grateful that our parents are still around because we never know how much we2019ll miss them when they2019re gone.

Mantra, MantraI WILL never be a registered pharmacist.
Not because I2019m not studying BS Pharmacy anymore but because I failed.
Failure.
 What an alien word.
I2019ve never encountered such.
I never understood what it feels like.
I never even bothered thinking of failing.
I have always been perfect.
Perfect.
 That is a word I deeply understand.
Perfect examination scores, perfect execution of a dance routine, perfect hit on the ball, perfect face2014perfection is completeness.
Perfection is having everything like money, talent, intelligence, looks and the likes.\t
Everything.
 Another familiar word.
I always thought I had everything.
I grew up smart, talented, with enough finances.
I grew up having everything.
But what happened?
Back when I was a kid, I would join every club in the campus.
Free time means meetings, practices, and workshops.
I have always loved being active.
I liked being on stage.
I loved seeing my name on the school2019s paper.
I find joy in having a position in the student government.

While juggling all of these extra-curricular activities, I still find time for studying.
I ace my subjects.
I am consistently on the honor roll.
I am my teacher2019s favorite.
I am perfect.
I never had vices.
Not once did I play DOTA or Counter Strike or whatever video game in my life.
My addiction is not on drugs or alcohol.
My addiction is to books.
I would spend my afternoons reading fictional stories.
I just prefer filling my mind rather than doing the unnecessary.
My plaques, medals, and trophies prove to be evidences of my early success in life.
  I was proud of them.
 Too much pride changed me.
After my mini-show during grade school and high school, I entered college with a confident stride.
Heads up, a strong vibe, and distinguished ways2014these are my tools on my first day.

My first year passed without any problem.
It was perfect.
I felt challenged.
I was compelled to do well.

I studied every excruciating Pharmacy subject very carefully while I balanced it with the dance club and the campus paper.
I even made it to the Dean2019s List on the first semester.
I was at my peak.
Second year of Pharmacy was pretty much the same.
I joined the same clubs, I studied my subjects, I performed.
  Everything was the same except for one thing.
I lost my passion in learning the course.
I realized a year after that I do not want to be a pharmacist.

You see, my bloodline is a string of medical practitioners.
My mother is a pharmacist and so is the mother before her.
My uncles and aunts are all in the field of health.
Basically, my family is my own hospital.
Realizing that I do not want to be one of them shames me.
I was supposed to be the first to continue the supposedly heirloom of our clan.

I am perfect after all.
I am proud after all.
I am everything after all.
But not at all.
I became passive in third year.
I didn2019t participate.
Pharmacy, the program that I am deemed to love, became boring.
I just didn2019t love it anymore.
The loss of spark is like falling asleep.
As expected, I didn2019t pass one major subject.
Thus, another year will be added to my college education.
To cut the chase, I shifted.
I ended up doing what I do best2014communicating.
I don2019t know why I even bothered enrolling in Pharmacy.
Pressure? The affirmation of my family2019s legacy? I don2019t have an idea.
All I know is I am happy where I am right now.
I might be sour-graping but I have never felt this kind of bliss with what I do.
Recently, my original batchmates passed their board examinations.
They are now registered pharmacist.
They can already put an RPh after their name.
Many people would assume that I was hurt or full of regrets.
 Wrong.
After learning that my friends passed their boards, I cried.
  I cried of extreme happiness for my batch.
I felt proud.
I felt their happiness.
That is the exact time where I know that I am truly and deeply happy with my decision to change direction.
I don2019t know how to explain it.
I just know.
Two years of delay is nothing.
In life, there will always be a lot of 201cwhat ifs201d.
What if I continued my original course? What if I studied one more hour for a test? What if I ordered one more cup of coffee just to stay awake just for the slightest time?
Millions of what ifs will always pave their way into our mind.
Yet, they are just that2014inside the mind.
What matters is what we already did.
I never regretted a single decision in my life.
If I never enrolled in Pharmacy, I wouldn2019t be able to meet my truest and loyal friends.
A med course is not easy.
I wouldn2019t be able to survive those three years without them.
Failure is inevitable.
We can never be perfect.
We will always have flaws.
There will always be a glitch in us.
 But that doesn2019t matter.
We can still be everything we want to be.
I will never be perfect but I can be everything.
This is my mantra.

Rich cultural heritage, with dash of modernism, Rich cultural heritage, with dash of modernism
The Adasa Ancestral House 2013 then and now.

Ben O.
Tesiorna, KNOWN as the Shrine City of the Philippines, Dapitan has a lot of heritage houses and old churches and buildings that are rich in history.

Among them is the Saint James Church located at the heart of the city.
The St.
James Church is considered as a lasting heritage and symbol of Christianization of the region.
It was built in 1871, in honor of St.
James the Greater 2013 Dapitan2019s patron saint.
It houses the priceless 1827 heritage piped organ which is German made with European pipes and a manual pump.
It was brought to Dapitan in 1864 by the Augustinian Recollect Father.

St.
James Church is also where Rizal stood while hearing mass on Sundays during his 4-year exile in Dapitan from July 17, 1892 to July 31, 1896.
In 1944, Japanese soldiers used the church as a resting/sleeping area for about five days.
Across St.
James Church a huge map of Mindanao, resting on a total land area of roughly 900 square meters, was constructed by Rizal.
He intended it as a motivating device for teaching history and geography to the townsfolk.
A shrine was also erected at the site where Rizal disembarked from the steamer "Cebu" in 1565.
The shrine is called Punto del Desembarco de Rizal and is located along the Dapitan beachfront.
It is also here where A 20-foot cross was erected to symbolize the propagation of Christianity in Dapitan.
Another shrine is the Rizal Shrine which is a major historical landmark of Dapitan City.
The 10-hectare piece of land was bought by Rizal from his winnings in lotto on August 1892.
It is here where Rizal's mother, Do\xf1a Teodora Alonso, his sisters, and some relatives from Calamba, Laguna came and lived with him until 1896.

Kinabayo Festival
Aside from shrines, Dapitan City is now also known for its Kinabayo Festival, which is celebrated every 25th of July, in honor of the city's patron saint, St.
James the Greater.

It was believed that in the year 722, an apparition of St.
James, atop a horse carrying a sword, guided the Spanish into victory over the Moors in the Battle of Covadonga.
Thus, Kinabayo Festival's highlight is a re-enactment of the Battle of Covadonga.
The performers enact the Christian and Moorish players, while riding horses made of bamboo and rattan.
Hence, the term "kinabayo".
On July 24, a "Halok sa Reliquias" is conducted from 8 a.m.
until 12 noon.
For four hours, thousands of devotees lineup for a chance to pay homage to the relic statue of St.
James before it is paraded at the town plaza just outside the cathedral.
As the clock strikes 12 noon, the statue of St.
James the Greater is then paraded around the plaza as thousands of devotees shout "Viva Sr.
Santiago" while waving bunch of San Francisco leaves.

Ancestral Houses
One of the few remaining original ancestral houses in Dapitan is the Antera Adaza Bajamunde residence more popularly known as the Pablo Page Ancestral House.
It was built in 1919 and is a combined Spanish-American domestic architecture.
Like any old houses, it has decorative and ornate woodworks with numerous huge windows.
Its walls and wide floor slabs is of hardwood like narra and kamagong.

Often the venue of various functions among the local social and political elite in the 1950's to 1970's, national dignitaries like the late President Ferdinand Marcos and world-famous violinist Gilopez Kabayao have been to this old house.

Another very prominent old house in downtown Dapitan is the Aniano Adasa ancestral house which now houses the Dapitan Tourism Office.
This house was built in 1900 and symbolizes American architecture with a touch of Spanish influence.

All in all, there are forty heritage houses in Dapitan City which forms part the Dapitan Heritage Zone as declared by the National Historical Commission of the Philippines in 2011 in time for the 150th birth anniversary of Dr.
Jose Rizal in June 2011.
Gloria de Dapitan/Fantasy Land
Amidst the old buildings and churches, Dapitan City is also home to Mindanao's one and only theme park called the Fantasy Land.
It is located inside the 3-hectare Gloria de Dapitan owned and operated by the Jalosjos family.
Fantasy Land is a smaller version of Disneyland in Hong Kong and the Universal Studio in Singapore.
It has about 35 rides and attractions including a horror house.
Every weekend, a light and show parade is held capped with a fireworks display.

Dakak Park Beach Resort
Another modern facility Dapitan has to offer is the world-renowned 5-star Dakak Park Beach Resort.
Aside from the white sand beach cove, it also has two huge swimming pools, three tennis courts, billiards and bowling alley, and a golf course.

Their latest rooms called the Garden Rooms are way, way better than their "old rooms".
 Garden Rooms have much modern amenities.

For those who love food, Dakak also has a Chinese restaurant that can cater to 1,500 people in one sitting, an Italian restaurant, a seafood restaurant that also serves as the view deck for the famous Dapitan sunset, a bar, and a cafe.

For the adventurous, they also offer horse backriding, all-terrain vehicle, zipline, rock climbing, wakeboarding, airsoft war game, rappelling, cove hopping, scuba diving, snorkeling, kayaking, banana boat ride, hobie cat, and jetski.
And for the romantics, they have the river cruise and sunset cruise.
A drink to freshness, A drink to freshness
LOOK WHO2019S ATTACHED? From someone tasked merely to check how the new business is doing, Justy Rhea Go Gesalem found herself getting attached to Toniq Juice Bar, giving it a special hands-on attention to make it the perfect health hub.
JUSTY Rhea Go Gesalem has been working since grade one.
Growing up in a business-oriented family means delivering service crew duties at a young age to obligations at the office in her teens.
But when she got the hang of it, things didn2019t seem so bad after all.
Justy2019s early exposure to business stems from being the daughter of a Cebuano businessman, the force behind major donut and fireworks brands, among many other established local ventures.
When they were capable enough, she and her three other siblings started training for rotational jobs for the family businesses.
Summers and semestral breaks would usually translate to job opportunities, from basic cashier roles to more advance descriptions like document control.
Read the full story in July 26, 2015 issue of Sun.Star Weekend.

All about breastfeeding, All about breastfeeding
BREASTFEEDING tightens the bond between mother and infant.
An emotional bonding is being developed during the act of breastfeeding.

Marianne L.
Saberon-Abalayan, THERE is much to learn in breastfeeding, the breastmilk being a dynamic fluid.
Doctor Ameleen B.
Bangayan bared this during a press conference held Friday at the Medical Tower of Davao Doctors Hospital.
Hence, they are organizing the 1st International Breastfeeding Conference and 3rd Breastfeeding Congress on August 8 at the SMX Convention Center in Davao City.
Bangayan, over-all chair of the event, said: "This is the first breastfeeding congress to be held in Davao as it is usually held in Manila.
This is also the first international breastfeeding conference that will be held in our city and we are very proud to host it."
She said two foreign experts American Jennifer Thomas, MD and Australian Julie Smith, PhD are keynote resource speakers of the conference.
Thomas holds a masters degree in public health  and she is also an international board certified lactation consultant .
She is a fellow of the Academy of Breastfeeding Medicine  and also a fellow of the American Academy of Pediatrics .
Smith has a Bachelor's degree in Economics, Bachelor's degree in Asian Studies and a doctorate in Economics.
Thomas will tackle maintenance of breastfeeding the infant - the normal newborn and appropriate supplementation; birth weight, Bilirubin and blood sugar, breastfeeding in special circumstances - an approach to the fussy breastfed infant, breastfeeding: medications, including illegal substances , and breastfeeding and the clinician - breastfeeding strategies for a successful practice.
Meanwhile, Smith will tackle marketing and the economics of breastfeeding - marketed environment: formula for fatness, seven deadly sins of obesity, how the modern world is making us fat and lost milk? Counting the economic value of breast milk.
Davao Doctors Hospital-based Doctor Sigrid A.
Barinaga, MD, FPOGS will discuss breastfeeding the preterm infant - feeding the preterm infants with donor's breast milk, is there a risk of CMV infection? 
While Dr.
Jeanmarie Cabrera-Salvador, MD, FPOGS, FPSREL, FPSGE will talk about breastfeeding and the family - breastfeeding, fertility and birth spacing, and using the lactation amenorrhea method.
Open forum and feedback evaluation will be held after each speaker's topic.
Davao Doctors Hospital Department of Pediatrics chair Doctor Jo-anne J.
Lobo, MD, FPPS, DPIDS-P also said that they target 800 registrants.
As of July 23, 373 have registered, half of which are doctors, 30 percent are nurses and the rest are students, midwives, health workers and lay people.
"By lay people we mean mothers and fathers.
We have partnered with the Department of Health as their facilitators will spearhead the workshop set in the afternoon for those who want to get their hospitals and lying-in clinics accredited with the department.
We hope more stakeholders will sign up and join us in this very rare opportunity of learning," Lobo said.
Davao Doctors Hospital lactation counselor Marianne V.
Tan said pre-registration is set until July 30.
Pre-registration fees are P600 for government medical professionals and students, P1,200 for nurses, midwives, allied health professionals, medical residents-in-training and lay; private practitioners.
On-site fees are P900, P1,500 and P1,800.
Mom-baby friendly 
Davao Doctors Hospital and Brokenshire Hospital are the only two hospitals in Davao City that were given certification as mother-baby friendly hospitals.

Dr.
Bangayan said, "Meaning, we at DDH have complied with the requirements.
We are also strictly implementing the milk code, promoting breastfeeding.
In our NICU , it's part of our policy that mothers are asked to sign that they are giving birth to an institution that follows the milk code."
She also said that their lactation counselors and nurses anticipate that mothers who just gave birth will have difficulty expressing milk in the first three hours so they help mothers with their lactation.
They also police donated breastmilk and check out its source so that diseases could not be passed on to the infant.
Optimum source 
Bangayan said, "Breastmilk is the optimum source of nutrition.
The main goal of this congress we wanted to have exclusive breastfeeding up to six months, nothing else."
Tan also said breastmilk contains colostrum that is very rich in antibodies that help protect a baby from infection, strengthens immune system of the baby and contains essential vitamins and minerals that help develop the brain and help prevent the infant from developing jaundice.
Bangayan added that breastfeeding doesn't only benefit infants but also their mothers.
"Breastfeeding give mothers a degree of protection from various illnesses.
There is an observation, a trend in studies that mothers get a degree of protection from ovarian and breast cancers.
The impact on economy, those breastfed have lesser incidents of diarrhea and respiratory infection.
As a community, if almost all are breastfeeding, there are lesser incidents of illnesses in the very young.
Breastfeeding is very important for mothers, babies and the community as a whole," Bangayan said.
Breastfeeding, according to her, also tigthens the bond between mother and infant.
An emotional bonding is being developed during the act of breastfeeding.
A chemical interaction between mom and baby happens during breastfeeding.
"Breastfed infants will grow emotionally bonded with you, easier to discipline them.
They are more calm and closer to their mothers," she said.
However, the decision to stop breastfeeding is a family decision.
Bangayan added, "If your breastmilk is still available then breastfeed until the child stops.
Before we encourage breastfeeding up to two years, now we advise them to breastfeed two years and beyond.
It's perfectly okay as long as the mother is still up to it, and if her routine is not being affected, then stop when the baby stops."
After breastfeeding a child, she advised that solid foods given to a child must provide the basic calcium requirements that can be found in milk as the child's demand for calcium grows when the age grows.
But she was quick to add that there is no other substitute for breastmilk.
Thus, it's still wise to consult lactation counselors and professionals when a decision to stop breastfeeding is finalized.

"Stopping breastfeeding, after all, is a family decision," she said.
Well, just like what Bangayan said, even a breastfeeding mother like me still has so much to learn.
And the best way is learning from the experts themselves.
Disabilities defined , Disabilities defined Ivy C.
Tejano, ACCORDING to the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, persons with disabilities  include those who have a long-term physical, mental, sensory or intellectual impairment.
Globally, over 1 billion people or about 15 percent of the world2019s population have some form of disability.
Approximately 110 to 190 million people 15 years and older have some significant difficulties in functioning.
 The rapid spread of chronic diseases and population aging contribute to the increasing rates of disability.
About 80 percent of the world2019s PWDs live in low-income countries, wherein majority are poor and cannot access basic services.
 The World Health Organization  in 2012 reported that PWDs have less access to health and other services therefore have greater unmet needs.
This holds true to many.
 
Davao2019s PWD Affairs Section representative Bong Comiling said that 80 percent of the government owned buildings violated the accessibility law.
He added that law remains a big issue on this matter.
 
201cHindi lang accessibility ang problema kundi pati na rin sa mga taong hindi marunong umintindi.
 
I am telling my brothers, we do not beg for their mercy, but we are availing our rights,201d said chess international master James Infiesto and president of Association of Differently-Abled Persons Inc.
.
  
A law states that no permit or license for construction shall be given unless it complies with the requirement of the accessibility law as stipulated in Section 1 of the Batas Pambansa Bilang 344.
 
Dr.
Sharon Lilly B.
Valdez, medical officer for the Department of Health2019s  non-communicable disease  Cluster Health in Davao Region, said with PWDs health and conditions, they need greater attention and considerations without discrimination.
Based on an administrative order obtained from the Office of the Secretary of the DOH, Census of Population and Housing  result on 2010 revealed that the country, of the 92.1 million household population, has 1.443 million or 1.57 percent PWDs.
The Calabarzon Region was recorded to have the highest number with 193,000 PWDs among the 17 regions, while Cordillera Administrative Region  had lowest number with 26,000 PWDs.

National Statistics Office2019s  record in 2013 revealed that for every five PWDs, 19 percent was aged 0 to 14 years, 59 percent were in the working age group , and 22.1 percent was aged 65 years and above.
With this concern, the DOH came up with a National Health Program  for PWD based on the Republic Act 7211 or The Rehabilitation and Self-Reliance of Disabled, to address barriers and improve the access to inclusive health and rehabilitation services.
Transcending disabilities, Transcending disabilitiesKriztja Marae G.
Labrador, 201cDISABILITIES201d as defined by the World Health Organization , 201cis an umbrella term, covering impairments, activity limitations, and participation restrictions.201d WHO views disability not only as a health problem but a complex phenomenon, 201creflecting the interaction between features of a person2019s body and features of the society in which he or she lives.201d  
One of them is Wilmo B.
Capoy, who was diagnosed with congenital visual impairment, a hereditary disease which can skip about six to eight generations.
 Being the eldest out of five siblings, three of them are affected of this disease.
  
Education is a struggle Life was not easy for Capoy, growing up with his disability during the time where there are still no special schools present yet for persons with disability  and he has to finish his elementary and high school education together with normal students.

201cKung naa kay disability lisud gyud siya mu-eskwela especially sa ako-a, sa panahon sa akong pag eskwela wala pa may school for the blind, I have to be in a regular school ,201d he recalls.
Then there is the mockery that comes with the bullying.
 
Capoy remembers that during his elementary years, his teachers would often tell him that he cannot finish high school but he did and during his high school years his classmates would tell him he cannot finish college but he did.

With his low vision during that time, Capoy finished school without the help of Braille.
He would read his books with his nose almost touching the pages.
Capoy learn Braille at the Davao Special School before he went to college.
 He finished his bachelor2019s degree in education major in English and law from the University of Mindanao.
 
201cIt2019s a childhood ambition , I2019ve entertained that one since I was a child but I was not lucky enough, I did not make it in the bar,201d he said.
He took his law studies while he was teaching English to the student of the Davao School for the Blind.
 
Local scene for PWDs With most local government units  in the region having established the required Persons With Disability Affairs Office  pursuant to Republic Act 10070 or the amended 201cMagna Carta for Disabled Persons201d, Department of Social Welfare and Development XI regional focal person for PWDs Cythina Umda\xf1a said that education and unemployment are still a challenge faced by most PWDs in the region.

Umda\xf1a said that not all public schools that offer special education are accessible to those PWDs especially the ones in the far flung areas and even though they have finished school not all of them are given a chance to be employed.
 
But she added that, with their continued measures in raising awareness together with private support groups, most of the PWDs, in the region are now aware of their rights and privileges through the many activities initiated both by the government and private organizations to advocate such.
Just like the recent celebration of the 37th National Disability Prevention and Rehabilitation  week last July 17-23 wherein their talents were showcased and services and seminars not only for the PWD sectors but also to the business sectors were conducted in order to raise more awareness to the laws in support for PWDs.
  
A vision for others 
Now at 61, Capoy serves as the principal of the Davao School for the Blind wherein he is also teaching English subject to his students and serving as an inspiration to them.
 Their school, supported by a German organization, provides free elementary and high school education for children with visual impairment, helping them live a normal life.
 
201cI want them  to be a productive member of the society through any endeavor that they will enter as long as it2019s a dignified way of living the most important there is they know how to persevere.
This is a highly competitive world, likened to a race you have to have proper stamina to survive, I always tell my students: you always prepare yourself, double your efforts so you can be at par with the sighted individuals because if you can do that I2019m sure you will have a place under the heat of the sun,201d he said.
PNoy quotes at Sona 2015 in GIFs, PNoy quotes at Sona 2015 in GIFs1."Ang sa akin lang po: Makaka-move on lang tayo kapag nakamtan ang katarungan."

2."Katarungan, tiwala, paglago ng ekonomiya, pagkakataon, pag-asenso.
Boss, ito mismo ang diwa ng 'Kung walang corrupt, walang mahirap.'"

3."Sa trabahong ito, para akong punching bag na tinapalan ng katakot-takot na duct tape.
Pero hindi ako natinag dahil nasa likod ko kayo."

4."Aanhin nga naman ang pogi points kung magpapamana lang din naman ako ng problema sa susunod na salinlahi?"

5.201cLahat ba ng ating naipundar, lahat ba ng ating pinaghirapan, maglalaho dahil lang sa isang eleksiyon?201d

6."Nasa unang yugto pa lang tayo ng dakilang kuwento ng sambayanang Pilipino."

7."Ngayon, taas-noo na tayong humaharap sa buong mundo at nasasabing, 201cKaya ko.
Kaya ng Pilipino.
Simula pa lang ito.'201d

What to do during an earthquake, What to do during an earthquakeRuth Abbey Gita, HAVE you prepared yourself just in case a destructive earthquake hits your area?
An updated map of the Philippine Institute of Volcanologist and Seismology  released in May showed that the West Valley Fault, which traverses Manila, Bulacan, Laguna, Rizal and Cavite, has the potential to generate up to 7.2-magnitude earthquake.
According to the 2004 Metro Manila Earthquake Impact Reduction Study, a 7.2 magnitude quake in Metro Manila could cause 33,500 deaths and 114,000 injuries itself and additional 18,000 deaths from the fire that could break out.
But tremors occur without warning, thus the public is urged to prepare ahead of time.
In this video, Phivolcs geologist Jeffrey Perez gave some reminders on how to be safe when you are indoors, outside the home, and in a moving vehicle during an earthquake.



How to survive a tsunami, How to survive a tsunamiRuth Abbey Gita, ONCE an earthquake occurs, the next thing that the public should prepare for is the possible tsunami.
In a leaflet from the Philippine Institute Volcanology and Seismology , tsunami is described as a series of waves commonly generated by undersea earthquakes.
Tsunami can occur if a quake is shallow  and strong enough to displace parts of the seabed and disturb the mass of water over it.
Tsunami wave heights could be greater than five meters.
Tsunami moves so fast, travelling at speeds up to 800 kilometers per hour across the ocean, according to the United States Geological Survey.
 
Will a tsunami strike Manila and other nearby provinces if a 7.2-magnitude earthquake occurs?
Phivolcs geologist Jeffrey Perez assured the public that the West Valley Fault, which traverses Manila, Bulacan, Laguna, Rizal and Cavite, is not capable of generating a tsunami unless the tremor is due to the movement of the Manila Trench.

In case of an undersea earthquake, Perez said residents along coastal areas in Manila and Camanava  will be affected.
Watch this video for some tips on how to escape a tsunami.
 


Facts and myths about earthquakes , Facts and myths about earthquakes Third Anne Peralta-Malonzo, AS RESIDENTS in Metro Manila prepare for the magnitude-7.2 earthquake which might result from movement of the West Valley Fault, Sun.Star collated facts and misconceptions about ground shaking.
 
The ground can open up and swallow people and buildings
It happens only in movies.
During an earthquake, the ground moves across the fault and not away from it.
201cIt will not be like what was seen in the movie 'San Andreas' where the ground opened and swallowed everything.
During an earthquake there will only be displacement as far as three meters,201d Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology  resident volcanologist Jeffrey Perez said.

Faults do not gape open during an earthquake, according to the United States Geological Survey.

 An earthquake cannot be predicted  
At present, Phivolcs said the science of earthquake prediction has not yet matured to the point that imminent earthquakes can be predicted  using a rational model.

201cThe exact date and time which the earthquake will occur cannot be identified by science.
All we know is that there is a fault which may be the source of the earthquake,201d Perez said.
 One should for head for the doorway during an earthquake
Duck, cover and hold  is still the best thing to do when you are inside the house or a building.
Those outside their homes can rush to an open field and stay away from power lines and buildings because debris might fall off the structure.

 201cTriangle of Life" as way to survive an intense quake  
Self-proclaimed rescue guru Doug Copp said that people should take cover next to sturdy objects, disputing the widely accepted practice of duck, cover, and hold.
201cIt is not true.
You will not be 100 percent safe with that .
What if the shelter or anything you are leaning crush on you, you will still be in danger,201d Perez said.
 An earthquake cannot cause death unlike flood and landslides 
The earthquake can't kill but its effects do: falling debris, fire and tsunami.

 
Watch Aquino's 6th Sona in GIFs, Watch Aquino's 6th Sona in GIFsLaureen R.
Mondo\xf1edo, PRESIDENT Benigno Aquino III delivered his sixth and last State of the Nation Address  at Batasang Pambansa on Monday, July 27.
As usual, the Sona was aired live on television, radio, and even the Internet.
 Sun.Star, at www.sunstar.com.ph, streamed it live courtesy of Radio-Television Malacanang .
The text of the President's Sona was made available to the public only minutes after the over two-hour speech that received mixed reactions from Filipinos anywhere in the world.
To those who missed Aquino's address to the nation, here are candid moments worth watching.
1.
Aquino was all smiles as he was greeted by members of a welcoming committee at Batasang Pambansa before his Sona.

2.
But, whew! That was the longest Sona of his presidency, at 2 hours and 12 minutes.

3.
In that 2-hour speech, there were seven coughing fits from the President.
Here's one.

4.
He also probably got a headache after he got booed by some lawmakers...and Senate President Franklin Drilon? Or was Drilon booing those who booed Aquino?

5.
Despite the jeers, everyone seemed to be happy, including Aquino's potential successors, particularly Vice President Jejomar Binay.

6.
Everyone was also a fan, most especially the Aquinos.

7.
Oops! Maybe not everyone was a fan.

8.
And maybe, not everyone cares what everybody's doing.

9.
Gonna chew gums instead.

10.
If you're wondering who received special mention, meet Aquino's househelp, Yolly Yebes .

11.
And members of Aquino's Cabinet.
Among them are:
Mar Roxas 

Defense Secretary Voltaire Gazmin

Paquito "Jojo" Ochoa

Tesda Director General Joel Villanueva

Education Secretary Armin Luistro

BIR Commissioner Kim Henares

Labor Secretary Rosalinda Baldoz

Chief Justice Ma.
Lourdes Sereno

11.
And here's a wacky face from Dinagat Islands Representative Kaka Bag-ao.

12.
Not all enjoys a wacky face though.
Boy Pick-up says "I have to look great on screen."

13.
And for that, high-five man!

14.
So, that's a wrap.
#EhDiWow!

Serving the under-served  , Serving the under-served  Karina V.
Canedo, THE newly organized Davao City Persons with Disability Assistance Office  has been hard at work to ensure that they can reach out to the persons with disabilities in Davao City.
First step: make sure everyone is accounted for through the issuance of identification cards.

Teogenes Comiling of the PDAO, which is still under the Davao City Social Service and Development Office, said that very few persons with disabilities  have the PDAO IDs.
 
"Para ma-avail ang privileges and discount sama sa number one 20 percent discount sa tambal, kung magpalit silang devices dunay 20 percent discount ug ang ilahang pamasahe 20 percent discount ," Comiling said.

PWDs are even entitled to 30 percent discount in big food chains and 5 percent discount from groceries from a maximum of P1,500 grocery bill a week.
All these they can have access to if they have the ID.

"Ang uban wala pay ID, ang uban PWD wala pa kabalo nga naa diay ID ," he said.
The PDAO would only be sought out when the PWD needs medical care.

"Pag naa na sa hospital diha pa magpa-ID.
 Unta beforehand asikasuhon daan ," Comiling said.
So far, they have issued a total of 6,000 cards including children, when the population of PWDs in Davao City for adults alone is already 12,000.
 
Last July 22, the highlight of the National Disability Prevention and Rehabilitation Week celebration was the issuance of more IDs where doctors were brought in to certify the specific disability the person has, still PDAO is calling out to those who are now aware.

"You won't be asked any certification if the disability is apparent.
Examples of these are those who have no arms or feet.
To those who had stroke and cannot come, the PWDs in the barangay level shall certify that they are indeed PWDs to avoid exploitation," Comiling said.

Apart from that Comiling said they already oriented the barangay captains on Executive Order 417 that allots 1 percent of the Internal Revenue allotment of the barangay for PWDs.
In this way, the barangay will always have a fund for the needs of PWDs, especially for emergency cases.

Organizations of PWDS can also submit project proposals for training seminars, mobility, and livelihood to further enhance their economic independence, the funds of which can be tapped from the Gender and Development Fund.

So far, only five barangays have implemented this law.
Also among their tasks, Comiling said, is to ensure the implementation of Presidential Decree 10524, which mandates the employment of the 1 percent PWDs in the total population of employees in government and non-government offices and the accessibility law.
Accessibility alone is already a major setback because 80 percent of the government offices in the city do not have the facilities for PWD access.

"Dili lang ni siya access sa structure, access  pud sa pagsakay, access sa communication labaw na sa mga deaf ug sa tanan nga PWD ," Comiling said.
Schools have no ramps and are not equipped with Braille books, there are very few government offices who have staff who can communicate in sign.
 
The City Social Services and Development Office CSSDO office is also a helping hand of the PWDs in attaining their programs.

"We work with our barangays we have social workers and one of the things that we do is organizing our differently abled persons because we believe that they are our partners in our livelihood programs" said Maria Luisa Bermudo, CSSDO Department Head.

Bermudo said they provide livelihood assistance for the families of children with autism, educational assistance and technical skills training for PWDs with their partners, the Department of Labor and Employment  and Technical Education Skills Development Authority  although at a limited scale, as yet.

She added that the Department of Social Welfare and Development is also providing support under the Bottom-up Budgeting in the shared livelihood, skills training and capacity training that includes computer repair, solar light making, food processing , agriculture, radio repair manicure and pedicure training.

The PDAO, she said, will hopefully be a full-fledged city office before the year ends as mandated under the Magna Carta for Persons with Disability.

"There are still many things for us to do not just government sectors but also private sectors and facilities to provide equal opportunities of for employment.

We also encourage private sector to hire PWDs as part of their corporate social responsibility and as a mandate of Magna Carta for PWDs," Bermudo said.
Suffering in silence , Suffering in silence Karlo Paolo R.
Pates, IF THERE is any person who will most likely be bullied, it is a person with disabilities.
 
The bullying starts as a child when fellow children would make fun of them or maltreat them knowing they cannot hit back.
As a grown-up some still experience various forms of discrimination and are not given equal treatment and opportunities for employment or in their work places.
 Robert Buenvineda, 36, who hails from Tagum City, and who was born with a deformed right hand, admitted that PWDs including himself have difficulty finding a job.
 
He has been on a job hunt for a year now, he said.
"Hantod karon wala gihapon nadawat sa akong giapplyan ," Buenvineda told Sun.Star Davao in a recent interview.
He does not know why, but he hopes that it's not because of his physical condition.
He has been applying as laborer, a job he once held.
 
"Dili man ko mahimong sagabal sa companya ug kaya man nako ang mga responsibilidad ," Buenvineda said.
 
Who are the PWDs 
In a 2005 data by the Philippine National Statistics Office  showed that many of the PWDs belong to the poorest sector in the society or below the poverty line.
  
The Republic Act of 7277 or the Magna Carta for Persons with Disabilities states that no PWD person shall be denied access to opportunities for suitable employment.
All should have the same terms and conditions of employment and the same compensation, privileges, benefits, fringe benefits, incentives or allowances as a qualified able bodied person.
 The same law gives PWDs incentives and exempts them from taxes.
 
Lawyer Jayson Balais, assistant regional director of Department of Labor and Employment, said they are aware of these provisions.
 
"Ang aming ahensya naman ay consistent na nagpapatupad ng ating mga batas upang walang mga incidents of discrimination among the PWDS," Balais said in an interview at his office recently.
But, he said, as in hiring of able-bodied applicants, the final say on who gets employed are the employers and company officers who know what skills and aptitudes they are looking for.
 
The provision about discrimination, Balais explained, is that when choosing between an able-bodied and a PWD applicant, the focus should be not on the physical attributes but on the qualifications of the position.
 
"We always make sure that the PWD community gets fair share of allocation of the DOLE budget every year.
We allocate the money for different livelihood programs for them," Balais added.
 
Various training programs are being prepared and organized for those PWDs particularly the blind, deaf and mute people who have the most difficult time getting a job.
 
Balais also advised PWDs who feel they are being discriminated at work to address their complaints at the provincial offices of Dole.
 
"They can seek help from our provincial offices in Tagum, Panabo, Mati, Davao del Sur or even directly dito sa regional office.
Yung complainants nila will be entertained kasi easy access ang office namin," Balais said.
The discriminated PWDs can also file their complaints addressed to the National Labor Relations Commission, a quasi-judicial agency attached to DOLE.
 
"If may mga termination complaints from the PWDs, titingnan muna natin yan kung toto ba.
Kung basis ba ng termination ng employers ay yung performances nila or primarily because of their disability," he said.
 
Sanctions against the employeers who violates the labor code of DOLE will be facing appropriate sanctions.
 
"Yung level ng sanctions may depend on the severity of the complaint or evidences presented against the employers," Balais said.
 
Grace Consolacion, 34, a resident of Kilometer 11, Sasa, Davao City, in a separate interview, said that she never gelled well with her workmates.
 
"Ginapafeel nila na lahi gyud ko.
Pasagdan nalang pud nako kay aron walay gubot ," Consolacion said of her work in a shirt manufacturing company.
 It's that preference to just keep quiet that draws a blind on what the regular PWD goes through in his daily work.
Balais confirmed that their office has not received any complaint from the PWD community in Davao with regards discrimination.
"Honestly, wala talaga," Balais said.
Their vision is clearer, Their vision is clearerRhealyn C.
Pojas, WHILE most of the people showered with more than enough light have complained with their daily hustle and bustle in life, students at Davao School & Rehabilitation for Visually Impaired , a private-run institution for people with visual impairment, embrace life despite its subtlety and emit brighter aura.

For them, life did not stop when their eyes fail to give light, instead life for them has become brighter even if darkness has been their constant companion since birth.
Laughter, smiles, music, and ability to compete -- these are some of the things that make their life colorful, beautiful and challenging.
And visiting a classroom in that institution, life itself, with all its complexities, will welcome you.
  
Meet Edmund Montecillo, president of the student council of the Davao School & Rehabilitation for Visually Impaired.
Like the rest of the students, he also has visual impairment.
It has been five years since he entered the school.

He recalled that he used to study in a regular school at Paitan Elementary School in Bukidnon when he lost his sight hen he was in second grade due to eye cataracts.
Because of that, even if it was against his will, he was forced to stop for three years because of his visual impairment.

But in June of 2010, Edmund was able to attend school again after being informed that there is a special school catering to young people like him who has visual impairment through a recruitment done by the personnel of DSRVI upon their visit to Bukidnon.

Edmund now stayed at the school's dormitory for free where he and the other students were taught not only how to read and write but as well as how to do basic household chores and even taught them sports and music.
Edmund, who is now 18, also narrated that in 2011, the school helped him to undergo operation but since his eye condition was already worst, his sight was not restored.

But Edmund never lost hope and he continued his study.
Now he is already in Grade 7 and even plays tenor and alto saxophones and actively participates in the school's judo club.
All of these, he learned in the school.
Edmund admitted that he had a hard time adjusting to the new way of teaching at first as he was used to the teaching done in the regular school.
He narrated that he had started again from the beginning since he had to use Braille.
According to the American Foundation for the Blind website, "Braille is a system of raised dots that can be read with the fingers by people who are blind or who have low vision."
"Naglisod ko og pag practice sa Braille pag-abot diri kay lahi ra ang porma sa alphabet sa Braille ," Edmund saidd.
Edmund said that special schools for people like him who has visual impairment are a big help.
Learning through touching
Learning through touching, that was how Jam Garde, a Physical Education teacher, explained the students' way of learning especially in physical activities.
Garde has been a volunteer teacher at the said school for four years now.
The ages of the students she was teaching range from 18 and below, she said.
"It is difficult because in teaching them actions you really have to do it yourself to show and let them learn through touching," Garde said.

School principal Wilmo Capoy said they already produced over a hundred graduates since its establishment in year 1981.
The school which was formally inaugurated in 1982, was the first school for the blind outside Luzon, explained Capoy.
Capoy narrated that the idea of putting up a school for the blind sparked from the program of eye doctors in Davao City for blindness prevention where they wrote a letter abroad and unexpectedly gained 100% support for an establishment of a school for the blind from the Hildesheimer Blidenmission  in Germany and Christian society.

Capoy said that during the school2019s first operation, it only had few students.
"Parents at first had apprehension basin gamiton sa syndicated mendicancy ang ilang mga anak ,"Capoy explained.
There are already eight alumni in their school who graduated from college and one of them is a social worker.

At present, the school has 52 students, and only three of them are staying out of the school's dormitory.
 Others are allowed to be home every weekend.
Though the school only caters grade school and high school students, Capoy explained that they were able to help some of their graduates to earn a scholarship for college education.
Capoy, being a person with visual impairment himself, aims for the students to become "productive member of the society."
He graduated at the University of Mindanao with a degree in Education and also graduated law in the same school afterwards.
"If you want to be in a race, you have to have the right stamina to survive," he said.
"If you will give up, you will not earned a place in the world."
Education for All
Everyone has the right to education, regardless of who they are, this is the reason why the educational program for the children with special needs is important, according to Davao City Special School principal Alma Tac-on of the elementary department.
The goal of education is to educate people regardless of their nationality, tribe, and even their special needs, Tac-on said.
She said the Davao Special School is the first school in Davao City to cater students with special needs.
It was established in 1975 but was first known as the Rizal Sped, located in Sta.
Ana, but was later transferred to Bangkal.
Students will first attend the self-contained class which has no grade-level and where their behavior will be tamed and parents2019 support is necessary.
If later on, the child is observed to be ready, they will be transferred into a regular class so that they will be moved to graded classes.
Parent-teacher partnership in a child's education is necessary, Tac-on added.
Teacher's Dilemma
While there are few schools in the city that offer education to children with certain disabilities, these are now faced with challenges and needs.
Capoy said there is still a big cut from the budget allocated to them by German organization that supported the school, but they are thankful the organization added a funding of P200,000 to their last year's budget.
From what was originally P4.5 million, the budget had been cut in half and is now amounting to only P2.4 million and this affects the students' budget for food and others which the school offered for free.

Tac-on, for her part, said that like regular schools, they too experienced different challenges.
"Kung challenges lang, dili gyud na siya mawala.
Kung naay challenges sa regular, how much more sa special?" Tac-on said.
No matter how organized your class is, there will come a time these special students throw tantrums and their behavior will be one of your challenges, Tac-on said.

But the number one problem lies on the parents who do not show much support on their children, she added, reiterating that education of children involved partnership between the teacher and the parents.

Collie Marvas of the Tugbok Central Elementary School and Amelyn Kantriman of the Imelda Elementary school also shared the major challenges that they experienced as teachers at Sped schools.

They both shared lack of special books for Sped class, lack of teachers, and assessment are some of the things that made their job difficult.
They both expressed that Sped students must have a special book for their education because if they will take the same books used by the regular, they can no longer be distinguished from the students taking the regular class.
Also, they said that there are not enough teachers who specialized in teaching special children and they also had problems with the assessment of the students enrolled in SPED schools since there are only few developmental pediatricians in the area.
But they all agree that one of the problems that they see is that the children with special needs are not exposed by their parents because they are embarrassed with them.
That is why the program advocates and campaigns for this matter so that the children with special needs who are just kept in their houses will also enjoy their right to education, they said.

According to the National Council on Disability Affairs website, in Davao del Sur there are eight public special elementary schools and 11 in high school while there are eight in the private special schools.
Top 5 most destructive earthquakes in the Philippines, Top 5 most destructive earthquakes in the Philippines
The Philippines straddles the western fringes of the Pacific Ring of Fire where most of strong earthquakes and volcanic eruptions occur.

Third Anne Peralta-Malonzo, THE Philippines straddles the western fringes of the Pacific Ring of Fire where most of strong earthquakes and volcanic eruptions occur.
Since the 1600s, the Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology said the country has experienced 106 earthquakes with a magnitude of 6.0 or higher.
Of this number, the deadliest earthquakes took place in the last 50 years.
August 2, 1968:  A magnitude-7.3 tremor shook Casiguran and some areas in Luzon, including Manila, where 268 tenants of six-story Ruby Tower in Binondo, Manila were killed when it collapsed.
August 17, 1976: A 7.9-magnitude earthquake and resulting tsunami hit the Moro Gulf, leaving over 5,000 people dead.

July 16, 1990: Parts of Luzon, particularly Baguio City and Cabanatuan City, were damaged following a 7.9-magnitude earthquake.
At least 1,200 people died from the quake.

February 6, 2012: Nearly 60 people were killed when a 6.9-magnitude earthquake hit Negros Oriental
October 15, 2013: Centuries-old churches in Bohol and Cebu crumble down to a 7.2-magnitude tremor, which also killed 222 people and injured 976 others.

Personality Profile: Music & law, Personality Profile: Music & lawGOING to law school and pursuing one's love for music is surely not an easy task to make.
Balancing two completely different things is at best an elusive ideal and at worst a myth.
For Kimberly Gayle Fabular, a 21-year-old law student and aspiring musician, the key to balance is simple: dissolve yourself in the process so the rest will come naturally.
"The moment that you think of it as a separate thing from your life, I think that's when you realize that you do not inherently have it," she said.
Kim, as she is fondly called by people around her, has inspired a lot and amazed many with her achievements in life.
She has aced academics and is now making ways to progress as a musician.
She was greatly influenced by her musically inclined family.
She recalls as a child that her father would convince her to sing for him while he plays the guitar.

"Pero naging interest ko is not entirely singing, I wanted to learn how to hold the guitar; gusto ko matuto paano tumugtog ," she said.
She graduated as top 6 in Magugpo Pilot Imelda Elementary School.
"I'll never forget that kasi wala akong part sa graduation yung top 5 lang meron ," she said.
Her interest in scouting grew when she was assigned as camp director of the senior camp and was chosen as the most outstanding girl scout of Davao del Norte in 2010 in fourth year high school.

She was champion in the First Communication Arts Festival - held in Manila on the same year.
This time, she graduated top of the class at St.
Mary's College of Tagum.
 
"Even in college, I still did scouting.
They asked me to represent Davao for a climate change forum in Manila," she said.

She went to the event and came back to Davao as an environmentalist, which was a huge factor on making her way to law school.
She was very dedicated on her advocacy to protect the environment, her thesis was entitled: "The role of democracy in environmental policy making".
It is centered on democracy in policy making.

It was also during college that her love for music has resurfaced because of the many opportunities laid for musicians to showcase their talents during University activities.
"It was my drummer boyfriend who really wanted to join in Awitenista and Musikahan ," she recalled.

Part of the rules of these events is to submit an original composition.
Kim's first entry, entitled "Home" was a contemporary song about love, which she wrote from her boyfriend's perspective.
Another song, "Black and Blue" is about being beaten up by the circumstances of being loved.
The song says, "Your love is raw, it does not pretend.
It may have hurt, at least I know it's true".
She explained "When there is pain in the relationship, it only goes to show that there are no pretenses that are happening." 
Her songs can be purchased in the Kalasag Office of Ateneo de Davao University.
Today, she is planning on releasing an extended play, which will be independently recorded and reproduced.

She has new additions on her play, one of which is called, "Happy Tears".
It is inspired by "friends who are stuck in the mud", the sad and depressed ones.

The purpose of the song is to tell people that it is alright to cry but also they must not let themselves get stuck on being sad.
There is always a time to cry happy tears.

The thought was beautifully encrypted in the lines, "Little tiny trembling heart, push the bottles to the side and start; Living with eyes open, life is just waiting to happen".

Right now, she is concentrating on her music but never releases for her goal to become a lawyer to gain more means in promoting for the preservation of the environment.

"The game-changer is politics.
I'm trying to be a lawyer for that," she said.
Kim added that becoming a lawyer is not the end-goal of her career but to be a part of a team who offers change to the world-a team who is capable of giving positive change.
Kim, now 21 and satisfied, shares how to stay focused even if others come your way, "I tell myself that I am strong, intelligent, and beautiful.
In the long run, if you keep on telling that to yourself, you will become one."Christine Joice C.
Cudis
Man who studied Cecil the lion for 9 years talks impact , Man who studied Cecil the lion for 9 years talks impact 
In this undated photo provided by the Wildlife Conservation Research Unit, Cecil the lion rests in Hwange National Park, in Hwange, Zimbabwe.
Two Zimbabweans arrested for illegally hunting a lion appeared in court Wednesday, July 29, 2015.
The head of Zimbabwe2019s safari association said the killing was unethical and that it couldn2019t even be classified as a hunt, since the lion killed by an American dentist was lured into the kill zone.

JOHANNESBURG 2014 When Cecil the lion's carcass was finally found after he was lured out of a Zimbabwe wildlife reserve to be killed by an American hunter, it was a headless, skinless skeleton the vultures had been picking at for about a week.
Conservationists decided the most natural thing was to leave the bones where they were for hyenas to finish off, said Brent Stapelkamp, a lion researcher and part of a team that had tracked and studied Cecil for nine years.
Stapelkamp darted Cecil and put his last GPS collar on in October.
He was probably the last person to get up close before Minnesota dentist Walter Palmer used a bow and a gun to kill the now-famous lion with the bushy black mane, its head and skin eventually cut off as trophies.
Stapelkamp had first alerted authorities that something might be wrong after Cecil's GPS collar stopped sending a signal.
The killing of the big cat in early July has unleashed global outrage, sending Palmer into hiding back home in suburban Minneapolis, leading to the arrest of the local hunter he employed, and prompting Zimbabwe's environment minister to say the southern African country would seek Palmer's extradition to face charges.
Stapelkamp shares the anger, not just because of the demise of Cecil.
Also because, he said, it's not the first time a lion has been killed illegally around Hwange National Park in northwestern Zimbabwe, a reserve known for its rich wildlife.
About a dozen lions in the region were killed illegally in recent years, Stapelkamp said, and no one was caught.
"I think this was just the final straw," Stapelkamp told The Associated Press in a phone interview from the Hwange reserve.
"Everyone locally just thought, no ways, we're not letting anyone get away with this anymore."
Cecil had an intriguing story, making him a celebrity in Hwange.
He arrived as a kind of lion refugee, alone and wandering after being displaced from another territory.
Cecil befriended another male lion, Jericho, and together they grew and watched over two prides, one with three lionesses and seven cubs and another with three lionesses.
Cecil's killing will have an impact on the area, explained Stapelkamp, a field researcher for an Oxford University study on lions.
Jericho may not be able to hold their territory alone and could be chased away by rival lions.
Unprotected, the lionesses and cubs would then be under threat and also move away or be killed.
Safari operators who invested millions of dollars in the area would lose one of their biggest attractions for tourists.
"They're burning fire breaks.
They're grading roads.
They're pumping water," Stapelkamp said.
"They're spending a lot of money in the management of lions and then someone just draws it across the railway lines having not paid a penny in its management and shoots it and runs away with its skin.
It's unacceptable."
Stapelkamp, unsure of the details of Cecil's killing, described the usual tactics of hunters to draw an animal onto private land and out of the park where it is protected.
The two areas are separated by a railway line.
Hunters shoot a zebra or giraffe and hang it on a tree; the main bait.
They then drag the intestines of that animal, "something that really smells," Stapelkamp said, up and down the park boundary behind a vehicle.
Sometimes they'll even play the sounds of a dying buffalo over a loudspeaker to attract a lion.
The lion "comes across that scent trail and it leads him straight to this bait," Stapelkamp said.
"It rushes in for a free meal and they're waiting ...
and they kill him like that."
Even on private land, this hunt was still illegal, Stapelkamp said, because no hunting quotas for lions were issued in the region this year.
Legal hunts do happen, he said, but only after authorities consult with ecologists and decide that it won't adversely affect the area.
This didn't happen with Cecil, Stapelkamp said, and he doesn't believe Palmer's story that he trusted his professional guide to ensure a legal hunt.
"He's a well-educated man, he's got a lot of resources," Stapelkamp said.
"You could do your homework.
Due diligence.
You would know that you're hunting in a controversial area.
You've got a GPS you could have in your pocket and you have a look at the map, and you say, 'listen, friend, I think we're in the wrong area.' There's no excuse."
Palmer came "with the intention of getting the biggest lion that he could and getting out.
And he got caught," Stapelkamp said.

Kadayawan season in Davao, Kadayawan season in DavaoRoark L.
Masbad, Wacky Tech, IT'S the second day of August and for us, Davaoe\xf1os, it2019s Kadayawan Festival month! Things pick up all around the city.
Tourists flood in.
Kadayawan-themed events happening here and there.
Fruits are aplenty.
Food gets better each day.

What more can I say? It2019s festival season and it2019s looking great!
I sure hope you already booked flights to Davao come August 17-23 for the main Kadayawan Festival week.
If not, there2019s still time to do that.
Who knows you might even still catch last minute discounted fares from our domestic airlines.

I, together with my fellow Davaoe\xf1os, hope to see you on the streets of Davao come Kadayawan!
Now on to some interesting news.
Email.
We all use it.
It2019s a vital mode of digital communication.
But for some of us, we get a bit paranoid if our emails are being tracked.
We get this hibbi-jibbie feeling that someone, somewhere knows what we2019re reading and when we2019re reading it.
I know.
It2019s scary.

Thankfully, there2019s a way to know in GMail if the email you received is being tracked.
Yes, it2019s for GMail only.
All the more reason why you should be switching over to GMail.
But that2019s another point.
Anyway, you2019ll need to be using Google Chrome as your browser for this to work.
The complete walkthrough can be found in this article.
More Google-related news.

We all know that pollution has gotten worse each year.
In some parts of the world, it2019s gotten so smoggy that you2019d mistake it for fog.
It2019s not.
And all around the planet, this pollution is slowly killing our only home.
We don2019t have any alternative planet to occupy and the closest one is millions of light years away.
Interstellar travel is still not possible.

So, to get more data on pollution, Google has tasked its Street View cars to map pollution.
Yes, pollution.
According to a Popular Science article, initial tests were 201ccarried out in August 2014, when three Street View cars tested Denver2019s metro area during a study for NASA and the Environmental Protection Agency.
The cars drove for 750 hours, plotting 150 million data points, and sensed chemicals like carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, nitric oxide, and methane."
If this can be done worldwide, or at least in the major cities, I think it would greatly help national governments to plot out what to do to address this problem.
Watch more about this pollution surver here:

Well, that2019s if for this week.
Next week.
I don2019t know yet.
Let2019s see what comes out in the coming days.
Till then! 
Small town takes on big mines, Small town takes on big mines
DAVAO.
With officers and members of of Nagkahiusang Mananagat para sa Kalambuan sa Ayoke.

Stella A.
Estremera, RED bald mountains loom over the green stretch of the coastal town of Cantilan, Surigao del Sur, the last town in the ore-rich region of Caraga to resist the encroachment of giant mining companies.

The people, however, are not just fighting mining through mass mobilizations and campaigns, they are offering an alternative that can bring in the money to more people: tourism.
On an outrigger boat toward Ayoke island, a sitio of Barangay General of the more 233 years old settlement, you catch glimpses of the barges and ships loaded with mounds of red soil that dwarf the backhoes that shovel the soil in.
No wonder the bald expanse of red mountains in the background looked angry...
But it's not just the mountains that are angry...
"People have barricaded the road made by Marcventures Mining and Development Corporation MMDC in barangay Cagangahan toward the neighboring town of Carrascal," said Emma Hotchkiss, president of Baywatch Inc., the organization rallying the people of Cantilan against mining.
Carrascal hosts the biggest mining operations in the province of Surigao del Sur and has mountains upon mountains traversed by hundreds of heavy equipment kicking thick clouds of red dust that reach the island group of Barangay General.
Hotchkiss was referring to the barricade set up in April 2013 that forced Marcventures to stop its incursion in Cantilan territory.
The Municipal Government of Cantilan has been waging a legal battle against Marcventures after it started mining operations in Barangay Cabangahan, through what town officials claim is a cancelled mining production sharing agreement  from another company, the Ventura Timber Corporation.
Marcventures has been insisting that its operation is aboveboard.
In May 2011, continuous rain unleashed floodwaters thick with silt that covered the rice fields with a mass of thick red mud.
The mud killed the rice plants and rendered the rice fields infertile until the residues were washed away for several planting seasons.
The fields became too acidic for rice to grow.
The greater source of unrest is that the slopes of Barangay Cagangahan are the headwaters of two of its major rivers -- Carac-an and Alamyo -- and irrigation sources.
The floods happened again in 2012, Mayor Genito B.
Guardo said.
"We have 2,200 hectares of rice lands, 1,800 hectares are irrigated.
The 2011 floods destroyed around 80 percent," Guardo added.
Worse, the mountains that nurture the minerals are not just where the headwaters are but also the watershed from where the town gets its drinking water.
"If our waters become polluted, what will happen to us?" Hotchkiss asked.
Voices from the fields
Anamae Fernandez Lico, a mother of four whose husband is an overseas Filipino worker , was supplementing their income through rice farming.
Rice farmers in Cateel observe two planting seasons a year.
For each planting, she spends P15,000, which she can recoup after harvest.
But when the floods came in 2011, the yield from her one-hectare field was just around 11 sacks.
"When the floods came, I could no longer recoup my capital and even until the second cropping I couldn't harvest enough because the floods brought in sand from the river when the dike broke," she said in the vernacular.

She stopped planting for two years and had to make do with what her husband earns for all their family's needs.

Chito Trillanes, spokesperson for the Vicariate of the Carcanmadcarlanpar  and chief of staff of the mayor, said that while the Alamio River regularly breaches its banks when the regular week-long rains in Cantilan would pour this would take hours even days, since the buildup of water is steady.
In the 2012 floods at the time that Marcsventures was operating in the mountains of Cantilan the Alamio overflowed in just 45 minutes.

"The flooding not only came from the minesite but also from the road widening made in their forestland, bringing silt two feet deep," he said.
The soil became very acidic.
The advice from agriculture technologists: increase the nitrogen.
This cost the farmers more, aside from the fact that too much nitrates from soil pollutes water sources.
The siltation also reduced the capabilities of irrigation systems to the point that as much as 450 hectares could no longer be irrigated.
The sad part is that while the people were trying to protect their land from mining, they were being sued for various offenses.
"This is a big blow to the people who are just protecting their livelihood when they are now the ones threatened," Trillanes said.
"All those mountains are our watershed, that is where all mining operations are," Barangay Cabas-an Councilor Agustin Andoy said.
Fr.
Frank Olviz, San Pedro Apostol Parish priest, reminded his people, "Atong kabukiran, tinubdan sa tubig .
No trees, no water, no water, no rice.
Dili dapat ta magduhaduha ."
Fishers, too
Carlos Consigna, vice chairman of Nagkahiusang Managat para sa Kalambuan sa Ayoke  said the northeast monsoon usually triggers flooding but for as long as they can remember, it lasts only up to three weeks.
Since mining started, their waters remain brown for up to two months.
"Silted ang tubig ," he said.
As a result, fishermen need to go farther to fish, as far as Siargao.
They also can't catch octopus that they can readily harvest in knee-high waters because the waters have become so silted they can no longer see where the octopuses are hiding.
"The dust from the mines reach our island during habagat.
The wind turns red," Consigna said in the vernacular.
Using a straight line from the beachfront of Carrascal's cove using Google Earth, Ayoke is around 12 kilometers away.
Nagmakaayo has a marine protected area with a 23-hectare core zone and a 19-hectare buffer zone.
General Island, the main barangay to which Ayoke belongs, also maintains a marine protected with a core zone of 28 hectares and a buffer zone of 19 hectares.
Ayoke is around three kilometers across the sea from General.
The MPA in General is maintained by the Islahanon Andam Magdumala Nan Kinaiyahan , a people's organization.
Islamdunk chair Eustaquio "Jojo" Juralba Jr.
said the waters around them become "kulay kape" during the rainy season.
"It's like a three-in-one coffee mix," he said.

Juralba, who is among those tapped to represent the grassroots aquatic sector in the court-appointed committee to study the environmental situation of Cantilan following a counter-charge of environmental case filed by the Cantilan government, said the initial studies made from samples gathered July 14-23 showed that all the town's rivers are polluted.

The case can drag on; the people meanwhile could go hungry and forced willing to sell anything to whoever lusts for their land.

Nature trips
Cantilan's name said to come from the word Tilang, the local name of giant clams , which used to be abundant in the town's water.
There are still enough remaining, but the mine's tailings and silt can easily kill everything in its path.
For as long as the floodwaters from the denuded mountains are not brought down by the rains, Cantilan's waters are very clear, you can see the seabed from your boat.
On General Island is the Bills' Sanctuary or Inijakan, a sanctuary privately managed by the William K.
Hotchkiss Foundation, Inc.
Foundation executive director Tanya Hotchkiss, Emma's niece, said the endangered Napoleon wrasses, can be seen scooting about at low tide along with some humphead wrasses.
Tanya said the island is also home to rufus hornbills.
Ayoke boasts of surfs that can give Siargao and Lanuza a run for their money, while the mainland has vast stretches of very fine black sand beaches.
Baywatch's Hotchkiss said that only Cantilan has both sunrise and sunset, and this can be experienced on Ayoke.
These, aside from the fact that this tiny town has already produced five generals of high ranks including the 24th and now retired Commanding General of the Philippine Air Force Lieutenant General William K.
Hotchkiss, who is current Director General of the Civil Aviation Authority of the Philippines; and the newly installed Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, Lt.
Gen.
Hernando Delfin Carmelo Arreza Iriberri, who before his appointment last July 10, 2015, was the 56th Commanding General of the Philippine Army.
"They were all raised from rice farming," Emma stressed.
They are drumming up interest in ecotourism to bring in the visitors and make people realize that there is more to be gained from tourism than from mining.

"From the person who produces the food to the souvenir makers, everyone benefits," Emma said.
They are inviting friends to come over and are earning some space in the media for their largely undiscovered destinations, and are encouraging organic farming to serve as food destinations, as well.
It's a race against time.
A look at the Mines and Geosciences Bureau website shows that there are 43 existing mining production sharing agreements in Surigao del Sur and Surigao del Norte, out of the total of 338 MPSAs all over the Philippines.
The agreements cover 3.91-million hectares, most of them for chromite, gold, copper, silica, and nickel.
More than half of the total area of the two provinces.
The two provinces have a total land area of 6.906-million hectares.
Cantilan has a total area of 240,100 hectares.
The two provinces also have four of the 30 existing exploration permits.

In the Ateneo de Manila University School of Government Policy Brief on Mining in the Philippines entitled "Is there a Future for Mining in the Philippines?" released in October 2012, it reads:
"According to the Mines and Geosciences Bureau , the mining  sector's contribution to national total employment has always been below 1 percent .
Recent data has shown that it has been 0.5% since 2008 until 2010.
So far, for the first half of 2011, contribution has been reported as 0.6% .
All over the world, extractive mining is known as a low-employment generating activity.
The Tampakan project, with expected investments of $5.9 billion, will provide only 2,000 permanent jobs."
In Surigao del Sur and del Norte, the only town putting up a fight against mining is Cantilan.
In the meantime, the 2016 elections loom.
Will the people decide for those who are for the sustainable or will the mining companies win the people over? 
Philippines whiz kids reap medals in 2 China math contests, Philippines whiz kids reap medals in 2 China math contests
The country2019s medalists with their team leaders in the 12th China Southeast Mathematical Olympiad  and 2015 China International Mathematics Competition .

WHIZ kids from the Philippines continued their winning streak by bagging medals and awards in two international math contests in China, including one where the country emerged as overall first runner-up.
In the 12th China Southeast Mathematical Olympiad  held in Fujian, China, the Philippine team won two gold, one silver and two bronze medals, and two merit awards.
On the other hand, Filipino students wound up overall first runner-up and bagged 23 individual medals in the 2015 China International Mathematics Competition  held in Changchun City in Jilin, China.
The 32-member delegation also took home three champion titles, four first runner-up and nine second runner-up trophies in the team and group contests and six merit awards.
201cOur students have shown again their excellence in math in the two contests.
We are very proud that they have brought home honor to the country,201d said Dr.
Simon Chua, president of the Mathematics Trainers Guild-Philippines .
The winners in the 12th China Southeast Mathematical Olympiad  are: 
Gold medals
Shaquille Wyan Que - Grace Christian College
Albert John Patupat - Holy Rosary College
Silver medals
Clyde Wesley Ang - Chiang Kai Shek College
Bronze medals
Adam Christopher Chan - Grace Christian College
Luke Matthews Bernardo - Philadelphia High School
Merit awards
John Aries Ceazar Hingan - San Beda College-Alabang
Xuanye Li - Xavier School
The team leader of the Philippine delegation is James Kelvin Martin of MTG.
In the 2015 China International Mathematics Competition , the Filipino individual contest winners are:
Gold medals
Steven Reyes - St.
Jude Catholic School
Bryce Ainsley Sanchez - Grace Christian College
Genrish Ng - St.
Jude Catholic School
Ryan Mark Shao - Xavier School
Vince Jan Torres - Sta.
Rosa Science and Technology High School
Silver medals
Angelo Vince Perez - De La Salle Lipa
Immanuel Josiah Balete- St.
Stephen2019s High School
Jessica Lorraine Gan - St.
Jude Catholic School
Stephen James Ty - Zamboanga Chong Hua High School
Shawn Darren Chua - MGC New Life Christian Academy
Christopher Banzon - Makati Science High School
Terence Brian Tsai - Chiang Kai Shek College
Matthew Angelo Isidro - St.
Jude Catholic School
Alyssa Guevara - Philippine Science High School-Main
Bronze medals
Patricia Faith Capito - UP Integrated School
Lance Henrich Lim - St.
Jude Catholic School
Frederick Ivan Tan - Xavier School
Vicente Raphael Chan - Zamboanga Chong Hua High School
Mark Edward Gonzales - St.
Paul College of Makati
Grant Aaron King - Grace Christian College
Sean Anderson Ty - Zamboanga Chong Hua High School
Steven John Wang - UNO High School
Jaymi Mae Ching - Jubilee Christian Academy
Merit awards
Wesley Gavin Palomar - Falcon School
Robert Frederick Uy - St.
John2019s Institute
Trisha Danielle Sia - Chiang Kai Shek College
Rafael Jose Santiago - Philippine Science High School-Main
Alyana Zoie Chua - MGC New Life Christian Academy
Angelika Joie Tagupa - Philippine Science High School-Main
The overall first runner-up in the elementary division is Philippine Team B composed of Balete, Capito, Reyes and Sanchez.
The team also won first runner-up in the team and champion in the group categories.
Philippine Team A of Jan Hazel Ragudo, Palomar, Perez and Uy, and Philippine Team D of Jodi Marcia Arcadio, Chua, Lim and Tan bagged two second-runner up prizes each.
Philippine Team C of Gan, Ng, Sia and Ty won first and second runners-up trophies.
In the high school division, Philippine Team B of Banzon, King, Santiago and Tsai and Philippine Team C of Isidro, Torres, Ty and Wang grabbed champion and first runner-up trophies.
Winning two second runner-up trophies each are Philippine Team A of Eason Wong, Chan, Gonzales and Shao, and Philippine Team D of Ching, Chua, Guevara and Tagupa.

Teacher on the streets, Teacher on the streetsRhealyn C.
Pojas, IF YOU search for her name on Google, you will be bombarded with her web images holding a microphone with a group of protesters at the backdrop raising big posters with markings in bold letters or find her name being mentioned every once in a while in different news websites in Davao City.
Her name is Sheena Duazo, 29 years old, the spokesperson of Bagong Alyansang Makabayan  in Southern Mindanao.
She could have been a teacher or a scientist like what she dreamed of as a child, but she has chosen another path which she herself never anticipated.
But indeed, she has become a teacher, not inside a classroom, but on the streets.
Duazo shared in an interview with Sun.Star that it never occurred to her that she will become a member of a militant group.
As a child, she said she wanted to be a scientist or a teacher.
She said she likes teaching children when she was just a kid that is why when she enrolled at Ateneo de Davao University , she took up a degree in Education, major in English.
Before that, she spent her elementary and high school years at Assumption College.

She was born on August 14, 1986 to Teresita and Eufenio Duazo, being the youngest among the two offspring.
Bravely speaking before the crowd while rallying in front of government offices, one could only wonder whether what could have pushed her to become what she is right now.
It was in 2005 when Sheena entered AdDU but she said that way back then, she did not care about social issues the way she cares about it now.
She shared that when she was in first year college, some friends from different organizations based in their school would invite her to join discussions, forum, and the like but at first she would refused.

But reality strikes her when she became a writer of the Atenews, the official university publication of AdDU which is a member of the College Editor2019s Guild of the Philippines .

The CEGP would conduct activities such as writer's trip where she had been exposed to various socia issues.
She had also once become a member of the League of Filipino Students , the first organization she joined in college.

During her third year at ADDU, her path had totally shifted, and it was a turning point in her life.
She had finally decided to leave school and become a full time activist/member of Anakbayan, another militant group.
She expressed in the interview that a lot of her classmates and even her family were against the idea.
"Sayangan daw sila sa ako," Sheena narrated.
She had just parted ways from her colleagues in school by saying not to worry about her because she is alright with what she had chosen.
Her decision to be a full time activist also did not skip her family's anger.
She said that there were times where she had been at odds with her family regarding her decision and those where the times where she left home.
But now her family and she are already in good terms.
She said that her family had eventually understood the path that she had chosen and the cause she is fighting for.
"Ang pag-ulsad sa sistema dili lang sa atong nasod kundi sa uban pud ," Sheena said.
"To reverse the pyramid where only 1 percent of our population, the capitalist and the bourgeois, are favored and enjoying the privileges," She added in the vernacular.
Being a militant, Duazo had already faced three charges and even received threats due to what she is fighting.
But she said that nothing can stop her from what she believes which is worth fighting for.

At present, Sheena is still working as a full-time activist with a militant group Bayan.
She was one of those who stand with the lumads during the commotion at Haran and continuously fights for the plight of the lumad bakwits and other activities where Bayan is organizing or involved.
 
Beauty Queen with a Purpose, Beauty Queen with a Purpose

Richmond Anthony Alfonso, NEWLY-crowned Queen Universe of the Queen Philippines 2015 pageant held in Cebu on August 1, 2015 Carla Marie Madrigal of Alubijid town in Misamis Oriental is bent to push her gender equality advocacy for the Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender  community.
201cI want to push through my advocacy which is gender equality for my brothers and sisters in the LGBT community.201d  
Besting 24 other candidates from all over the country, Carla Marie, born Ben Carl Embradura Galarrita of is the embodiment of poise, beauty, and brains, bringing much pride not only to the LGBT but the entire Misamis Oriental.

Carla Marie is the third of five children born to Benjamin and Jean Galarita.
She grew up in Zone 5 Lanao, Alubijid, Misamis Oriental and is a BS Tourism undergraduate of Liceo de Cagayan University.

At a very early age, she realized that there was something very different about her; she didn2019t like playing with toys made for boys and was more interested with Barbie dolls and playing with girls.
It was not easy growing up, but Carla Marie was luckier compared to others like her because she had a very supportive family.
 
201cThe hardest part of being a transwoman growing up is that you face discrimination in your society.
In my case, I2019m a bit lucky because my family accepted me.
My dad accepted me for who I am because, he said, at a very young age he already saw a potential in me.
So when my dad accepted me2014when the head of the family accepted me, the rest followed.
So I don2019t have any problem with my family but outside the house it2019s very, very hard.201d  She added, 201cSometimes, when you walk along the street, in public places, somebody will just should at you, 2018Bakla, bakla!2019 or 2018Bayot!2019 They will say 2018Salot!,2019 they will curse you.
Hey, wala naman kaming ginagawang masama.
Why is that? The best thing to do is just to keep silent and be professional.
Just think that you are special, there2019s something in you.
I always keep that in mind.
I always think positive and besides, my parents raised me well.
So I always forgive all of them.201d
She dreamed of becoming a doctor, or an attorney, or even a scientist when she was young but realized after joining numerous pageants that what she really wanted to become was a beauty queen and inspire other people through her advocacies.

She has been joining gay beauty pageants since she was 17 years old just after she had to stop going to school.
For the young 520199 stunner, it was all about the fame and cash prizes in the beginning but slowly came to understand that there is a higher purpose to these pageants.
 
201cI realized that this is not just about the crown.
 I2019m joining because I have a goal, and that it to become an inspiration to everyone.
I have an advocacy that I want to be heard of and I want to promote,201d said Carla Marie in an interview.
 
Her advocacy focuses on uplifting the trans community and how society accepts LGBT, 201cBecause in order for us to do well in our community we must have to be accepted first.201d She plans to conduct seminars and orientations that educate other people regarding sexuality.
 
201cI want to indulge myself in new things which will benefit me and my people, to be active in LGBT activities, to be fully aware of LGBT rights, involve myself spiritually and morally.
This is not just all about glamour, this also include service, because I am not just here in this pageant to win.
 I2019m here to make a difference.201d
Before competing in the Queen Philippines 2015 Pageant, Carla Marie trained with Kagandahang Flores, the prestigious pageant camp that has produced winners in the international pageantry circuit, for Pasarela or catwalk training and how to act like a beauty queen.
 
To maintain her 36-26-38 figure, she exercises regularly and makes sure that she has a healthy diet.
 
201cSometimes to get what we want the most, we have to do what we want the least and that includes the sacrifices I have made in joining this pageant.
I love food and I am person who eats everything so it2019s a bit hard but it2019s more like a matter of self-discipline.201d  
She also had to contend with homesickness, being far from family and friends, and having to move to Cebu in order to attend all the activities of the pageant.
 
201cI also love reading and watching informative shows just to be aware of what2019s going,201d this is to prepare herself for the any possible questions that might be thrown at her during the Q&A portion.
 
201cIf you are well prepared mentally, physically, and, most important, spiritually, and believe in yourself, then there's no space for difficulties and hurdles.201d  
She credits her team and strong support system from family, friends, and the people of Misamis Oriental as helping her prepare for the competition.

The 25 candidates of Queen Philippines 2015, chosen from 150 aspirants in a rigorous screen process, battled it out in an intense competition of beauty and brains at the Waterfront Hotel in Cebu City.
 
201cI never really considered it as a contest with the 24 ladies who are vying for the crown, but I took it as my night.
 
And the audience, they just all came to witness my coronation.201d  
Queen Universe Carla Marie Madrigal also plans to participate in the Miss International Queen pageant in Thailand.
 
201cI will make sure that I will be a good example not only to all transgender women, the LGBT community, but also to the straight people not only here in the Philippines but hopefully all throughout the world.201d
Bringing BBL to non-BBL land  , Bringing BBL to non-BBL land  
The participants with forum speakers Rep.
Sitti Djalia Turabin-Hataman, Baiking Edress, and Samsodin Amella  and Ifugao Rep.
Teddy B.
Baguilat.
Stella A.
Estremera, MINDANAOANS get a glimpse of it every time Bangamoro and peace in Mindanao becomes the topic 2013 people outside Mindanao love to cast judgment but are basing these judgments on the life-long prejudices they were fed by an equally prejudiced environment starting from the family, and then the school.

This was very apparent in the gathering of Cordilleran student leaders to tackle the Bangsamoro Basic Law  held at the Ating Tahanan of the Girl Scouts of the Philippines  last Friday in Baguio City.
Initiated by the Kaya Natin Movement for Good Governance and Ethical Leadership and the ForumZFD-Civil Peace Service, a German non-government organization working on peace concerns in Mindanao, the forum gathered some 40 college students from various state and private colleges and universities in the Cordillera Administration Region  to learn from and interact with young Moro leaders.

201cIt is similar to what Al Qalam Institute is doing in Mindanao for the last three years of Youth Peace Camps.
Our main objective is to educate our youth about the history of Mindanao and the Bangsamoro people,201d said Mussolini Sinsuat Lidasan, executive director of the Ateneo de Davao University based Al Qalam Institute for Islamic Identities and Dialogue in Southeast Asia, who was among the speakers in the forum.

Lidasan tackled 201cUnderstanding the BBL as a result of the Bangsamoro Peace Process201d.
From the responses of the student-participants on how they feel about the BBL and the peace process, what they understand and not understand about the BBL and the peace process, what is clear is that there is very little understanding, but that there is a willingness to understand.

201cThe whole law is unclear as to its position in answering the call for justice for the people who have lost their lives in bringing about peace in Mindanao,201d one of the participants wrote.
201cThe peace process is certainly not working, not for the people in Mindanao and not for the Philippines.201d 
201cIt is clear to me that the reason why they are pushing this is because they want peace in Mindanao.
But I still have the question in mind, is it the only thing that they want? Or is the issue on peace just being used to advocate simply their real motive,201d wrote another.
 
With the morning and afternoon session tackling the issues of BBL and the Moro conflict, the students were more accepting of what the Moro people are asking for, with the various resource speakers shedding light and sharing experiences on how it is to live in a land of conflict.
There is little they know of Mindanao, in the first place.

201cNoong elementary, ang tinuturo lang tungkol sa Mindanao na yung mga tao doon, barbaric sila,201d said Maureen P.
Pulido, a Bachelor of Arts in Political Science student of Saint Louis University in Baguio City said in an interview when asked what she recalls of Mindanao in their Araling Panlipunan in school.
 
201cIn school, we were made to believe that doon lang tayo naging civilized pagdating ni Magellan, we were never taught about the kingdoms in Mindanao and how advanced they were there long before the Spaniards came,201d said Kenneth R.
Fabia, a Bachelor of Arts in Legal Studies also of Saint Louis University.
Pulido hails from La Union and is just in Baguio to pursue her studies, while Fabia was born and raised in Baguio.

201cI only know of BBL on the surface level lang, that the Autnomous Region for Muslim Mindanao  will be replaced by the Bangsamoro and that this will be like a parliamentary system,201d Fabia said.

While Pulido said, 201cAng pagkilala ko sa Bangsamoro is that with Bangsamoro, Mindanao will separate from Luzon and Visayas as a substate or in a Federal system.201d It is this lack of knowledge that these peace camps are trying to address, Lidasan said.

201cOur main objective is to educate our youth about the history of Mindanao and the Bangsamoro people.
We re-designed the program in order to reach the youth from the northern part of country,201d he added.
 
It is of note that most combatants of the government, whether they are special forces of the PNP or foot soldiers of the Armed Forces of the Philippines come from the Cordilleras.

Driven by poverty and the dream for a better life, these men join the service and are sent to parts they are not familiar with, including those among the Mamapsano2019s ill-fated SAF44.
201cThey  sent soldiers mostly from the North to fight the rebellion in the Muslim South.
Why? ....
both are victims of oppression, structural violence..
and both wants autonomy...201d Lidasan wrote as a status update in his Facebook page earlier.
Rep.
Teddy B.
Baguilat of the lone district of Ifugao shared during one of the sessions that tackled hearing and the peace process, specifically after the Mamasapano incident.

Baguilat2019s brother Capt.
Winston Baguilat of Philippine Military Class of 1990 was killed in Basilan in 1998, while a cousin was a survivor of the Mamasapano gunbattle.

It is apparent that the conflict in the country2019s southern island is also hitting the families of the north, and yet their youths can hardly grasp the reason for the conflict.

201cFrom our local initiative of peace camps, we hope that we can connect our youth from the South to North for a long lasting peace in our country,201d Lidasan said.

The Moro people, however, hold much hope for the BBL having seen improvement in the way they live, even on a superficial level.
201cYung mga sundalo bumait,201d said Samsodin Amella, who along with Rep.
Sitti djalia Turabin-Hataman and Baiking Edres shared their personal stories during the fourth session of the forum, which sought to provide context and background of the Bangsamoro struggle for self-determination.
 
201cAng mga taong gobyerno, maganda na ang pakikitungo mula nang mapirmahan ang framework agreement.201d This is in contrast to the decades that Filipino Muslims have been distrusted and discriminated.

201cNoong elementary kami angtawag sa amin Muklo.
Kung may mga laruan kami, mga baril-brail, pag Makita yung ng ibang bata, kukunin,201d Amella recalled.

It became worse during the years after the September 11, 2001 attack on the twin towers in New York City.

201cKung pumupunta kami ng Maynila noong nangyari ang twin towers, ang lalaking may balbas at babaeng maka-hijab, terorista,201d he said.
201cTerorista pala kung lalaki,201d he added, eliciting laughter from the audience.
Amella also recalled how they accompanied some family members of the SAF44 who asked to visit Tukanalipao, the massacre scene in Mamasapano.
201cYung sa SAF, karamihan noon mula ditto , gi-facilitate naming ang pagpunta nila doon sa encounter area.

Nag-ritwal sila, para lang matahimik na ang kaluluwa ng mga SAF,201d he said.

201cHindi namin kagustuhan yan at hindi naming kagagawan yan,201d he said, pointing out that when wanted Bangsamoro Islamic Freedom Fighter  leader Umbra Kato was killed in a separate operation after the Mamasapano incident, there was no carnage outside the target.

Fabia said that throughout his school years, he is now in fourth year college, there has been no other forum that tackled Mindanao situation.
Attending the Baguio forum, he said, was the very first time for him.
Pulido said that in listening to the forum, she gained a grasp on what is being fought for, and that all these is not just about territorial rights but a history of government abuse and neglect.

201cIt2019s already saddening when you just hear the news on the radio,201d Fabia said, 201cBut seeing their eyes, you can feel the pain.
Yung question niya , if you were there what will you do? Parang hindi ko kaya.201d 
From teacher to supervisor , From teacher to supervisor 
UP.
Five new education supervisors together with Deped Regional Director Alberto T.
Escobarte.
Melanie Ple\xf1os Estacio is second from left.
Maria Gemima C.
Valderrama, MELANIE Ple\xf1os Estacio recently transferred to the Department of Education Regional Office with the same position as education program supervisor but with greater responsibilities.
While in DepEd Davao City division, Melanie developed modules in Multiple Intelligences in Teaching English and Arts used by English teachers in Davao City.
 
Aside from that, she chaired the group that developed Assessment Modules which were used by two other regions 2013 Armm and Soccksargen.
Melanie shared that she always wanted to become a nurse but her mother who was an elementary teacher then convinced her to follow her footsteps.
 
So right after graduating Bachelor of Secondary Education at Holy Cross College of Davao in 1992, Melanie began her teaching career at Stella Maris Academy of Davao  as an English teacher.
She stayed in SMAD for six years and made teaching her vocation until she decided to move to public school.
 
In 1999, she started teaching at Sta.
Ana National High School.
She was an English teacher, a class adviser, and School English Coordinator.
From 2005 to 2009, Melanie became the Regional Student Assessment Officer of the Basic Education Assistance in Mindanao, a project geared towards the improvement of the quality of and access to basic education in Central Mindanao.
 
In 2007, Melanie was promoted as education program supervisor in DepEd Davao City division.
  
She obtained her Doctor of Philosophy Major in Educational Leadership at the University of Immaculate Conception in April 2015.
She finished her Master of Arts in Teaching with Specialization in English Language Arts at the Philippine Normal University in 2002.
  
For short courses, Melanie had her E-Learning Graduate Course in English as a Foreign Language in Indiana University2019s School of Education, a scholarship sponsored by the Embassy of the United States of America.
  
For two weeks, she attended the Summer Institute for English Language Educators in 2009 sponsored by the US Department of State, Hawaii Pacific University in Hawaii, USA.
 
She also went to Melbourne, Australia for the Assessment Fellowship Training Australian Council for Educational Research in 2006.
Melanie is one among the DepEd Davao Region officials who passed the Career Executive Service Board  Assessment Center.
 
Along with Melanie are four new education supervisors in DepEd Regional Office namely Pedelina O.
Huevos, Maria Cielo D.
Estrada, Maria Liza I.
Berandoy, and George N.
Wong.
Melanie is married to Jessie, a mechanical engineer of Hitachi based in Tokyo, Japan.
  
Although they only get to be together every six months, the couple made sure the children grow with wit and conviction.
Their two children, Justin Matthew and Jerald Martin, are consistent honor students in Ateneo de Davao University grade school department.
Sanitation is key, Sanitation is keyKarina V.
Canedo, DAVAO City Health's office sanitation division Chief Robert "Bobet" Oconer is known to be firm and strong leader such that he earned monickers like "Messenger of Death" and "Berdugo ng City Health Office ".
One mediaman even said, "Pag naa si Oconer, naa ju'y makulban ug kaldero ."
While many may think this is negative, this is actually a peek into his straightforward ways.
Oconer earned quite a reputation in his irrefutable good performance as a chief of the division which the primary concern is the safety of our food and environment.
Oconer is a sanitary inspector for 25 years already and still counting.
As a chief, Oconer brought changes in the landscape of sanitary health especially in Davao city.
It was Oconer who called official attention on sexual acts done by masseuse at the once dark and neglected Osme\xf1a Park.
Now the park has been renovated, is properly lighted and has CCTV cameras and security guards.
He has been tough against illegal vendors selling food along sidewalks, establishments found violating the sanitary code, and livestock farms that endanger people's health.
Just last few months ago, he led the closure of 19 maternity clinics which did not pass the sanitary code.
His job is not that easy, he says, he even had death threats.
"Marami yung mga threats sa akin pero sabi ko nga kung matatakot ako sino pa ang mag-iimplement ng batas," Oconer said.
He said that he would sometimes feel guilt for those whose stores he has ordered close, but he has a job to do.

"Iniiyakan ko lang pag nagpapasara kami ng mga one hundred plus, two hundred plus employees ang nawalan ng trabaho, at nagpapademolish ako ng vendors na alam kong yun lang ang bread and butter nila, pero wala akong magawa e yun yun.
I get over it by thinking that I am serving Davao city well, yun ang iniisip ko kaya nakakaget-over ako sa guilt ko.
I have this mindset that, we are paid to make people's lives better," he said.
"Gusto ng tao paggising niya ay mabango yung hangin na inaamoy niya,  hindi yung amoy piggery or septic tank, gusto ng tao na makatulog ng maayos wala yung ingay ng videoke shop.
Implementers po kasi kami, we implement law kami ang sinasandalan ng mga tao pag may complaint tatakbo sila sa amin," Oconer added.
A product of a broken family Oconer said that who he is now is because of his mom who raised him and his brother by herself after his father left them.
"She's one of my idol, nakayanan niya yun, my mother was very strict, she is raised a very devoted Catholic.
Typical na parang Spaniard ang nanay ko konting pagkakamali, konting pagkakamali, babalutin ka ng palo, with that kind of discipline we were raised by my mom well, hindi kami naligaw ng landas considering 80 percent ng broken family naligaw ang landas," Oconer said.
He did not see his father for a couple of years.
His parents separated when he was in grade 2.

Oconer himself is a happily married for 31 years and has three sons.
His wife Rosario Oconer is a Dean of San Pedro College.
His three sons are graduates of Information Technology, Nursing, and Business Management.
"My wife is very understanding to me, especially in my work, because my job requires no specific time, tatawagan ka kung may nahuling ganito...
septic tank, merong food poisoning...
Sunday kailangan ka, nandyan ka kung merong calamity.
One time may bumaha at birthday ng anak ko December 18 two years ago, I formed my team, sabi ko wala akong magawa, baha sa Davao city noon," Oconer said.
He said his sons are like friends, and drinking buddies, and they tell him his problems.
He also said that he also disciplined his sons well and none of them have gone astray.
Right now he handles 24 sanitary inspectors and it's been quite a tough job since some of them are older than him.

"I have 24 sanitary inspectors who are hard headed believe me, before it looks like it's hard for them to accept me as chief.
I am quite young compared to those who've been inspectors for 30 years or 40 years even, those senior sanitary inspectors, the oldest served for 44 years, it's hard for them to accept me.
I told them give me half of your quality time para sa katawhan, masaya na ako doon." Oconer said.
Under Oconer's stewardship this August 20 next week their office will be receiving the Best Sanitary Division Award at Royal Mandaya Hotel, which is the first time for the Department of Health to give such award.
Oconer himself won two best sanitary inspector awards in a row.
But he's not content and gives himself just 80% rating.
He also looks forward to the 20 more sanitary inspectors promised by Mayor Rodrigo Duterte.
Oconer was born on May 25, 1965.
His father who used to be a manager of what once was Sarmiento, now Tefasco, and his mother used to be a government employee at city economics office.
He is the eldest in many ways: the eldest son, the eldest nephew and the eldest cousin in the family.
He has one brother now working as a supervisor at Philippine Amusement and Gaming Corporation .
Oconer is a graduate of Bachelor of Science in Biology at Davao Doctors College and Zoology at the University of Perpetual Help Rizal, Las Pi\xf1as City, Metro Manila.

He chose biology because his family wanted him to be a doctor or a dentist and proceeded with zoology because during that time he aimed to work in Saudi Arabia where fisheries is a major industry.

He did work in Saudi for three years but not as a zoologist but as an assistant maintenance supervisor without the slightest idea on pipes and the swimming pools.

He got hired there with his aunt and uncle's help, it was the time of the first Gulf War.
He also worked at hotel Nikko in Makati as a supervisor, but little did he expect that his next job would be something that changed the course of his life forever.
"After doon  dito  na.
Pinasok ako ng mother ko.
At first I was hesitant kasi government maliit ang sweldo, but eventually nagustuhan ko naman din kasi pagkapasok ako sanitary inspector agad ako.
Up to now.
I have been a chief for five years now," Oconer said.
A boxful of healthy, A boxful of healthy
FARM TO BOX TO TABLE.
Bibo Moreno and Chime Bosabel put a premium on the freshness of Diet in a Box2019s ingredients, which are locally sourced, mainly from Bibo2019s mini farm and the community farm project both in Aloguinsan, as well as from organic suppliers in Balamban and Talamban.
Deneb R.
Batucan, Bibo Moreno and Chime Bosabel deliver farm-to-table goodness
, HEALTH and wellness are two things that are of utmost importance for Bibo Moreno and Chime Bosabel.
Bibo, a chef and entrepreneur, and Chime, a learning and development specialist at a BPO company, first found their love for healthy organic food during their weekly weekend getaways to Bibo2019s hometown in Aloguinsan.
201cWhenever we visit their place, Bibo and his mom would normally prepare healthy sets of dishes for us.
I was amazed that they get their ingredients straight form their mini farm or from Aloguinsan2019s community organic farm,201d said Chime.
More about their story in August 16, 2015 issue of Sun.Star Weekend.
Click here to read more.
2018Sticker Ko, Idikit Mo2019 Back on the Road, 2018Sticker Ko, Idikit Mo2019 Back on the RoadCITY OF SAN FERNANDO -- Central Luzon2019s two-time best FM radio station adds another feather in its cap as it celebrates its 20th anniversary on the airwaves ---A good reason for 201cSticker Ko, Idikit Mo201d to be back on the road.
More are guaranteed to join the long list of winners in the LausGroup-run DWRW 95.1 FM's anniversary blowout: "Sticker ko, Idikit Mo" Part 4.
201cTwenty years after, RW 95.1 FM is still at it, staying close and connected with all our listeners while continuing to keep our cabalens and ka-rehiyons informed, educated and entertained on-air with music, commentaries and shows that define our region and the Kapampangan culture in particular,201d  said DWRW 95.1 FM General Manager Perry Pangan.
201cSticker Ko, Idikit Mo,201d on its fourth consecutive year, is just one of our ways to stay connected and thank all our supporters, the general public in particular,201d he added.

Public utility vehicle drivers, private car owners, establishments and vendors will still get the chance to bring home P1,000 in cash by simply placing the RW "Keni na Ka!" sticker in a visible area of their jeepneys, buses, vans, cars, tricycles, pedicabs, stores, and booths, when stickering happens again on August 17 , August 20 , August 27 , and September 1  and September 3 .
A day after the stickering date, raffle winners will be announced and on-air interviews will be done on Talakayan Ngayon , Music Babad , R.U.N.
, Afternoon Ratsada  and Ingat sa Road .

All participants have to do is fill out a raffle form with details and put the sticker on the vehicle or store for a chance to join winners like for August 10: Matias Figueroa, Antonio Garica,  Carlo Feleciano, Jhun Esguerra, Larry Zapata.
August 13:  Eldread Naparato , Ma.
Lilia Gonzales, Bernie Manalo, Nolan Gonzales and Arthur Bacani.

So, what are you waiting for? Idikit mo na and win! RW95.1 FM: "Keni na Ka!" 
More than able, More than able
DAVAO.
Danilo Roman flashes his gold medal as he poses with his parents Danilo and Julieta.

Ruji Peter S.
Abat, WILLPOWER, the passion for the sport and having surrounded by supportive family and peers was enough for Danilo Roman, a swimmer with intellectual disability, to reach the pinnacle of special athletes, as he went home with two gold medals in the swimming event of the 2015 Special Olympics World Games held recently in Los Angeles, California.
A Nicaraguan who found a home in Davao City topped the M8 200-meter freestyle and the M6 division 100-meter breaststroke events while adding a bronze medal in the M4 100-meter butterfly.
Danilo's mother Julieta, who is the president of the Special Olympics Davao Chapter, told Sun.Star Davao: "We are extremely grateful to Philippines, with our current home city, Davao, and especially thankful to Special Olympics Philippines for giving Danilo the opportunity to make his dream come true."
But she said Danilo's gold medal performance was a hard road as it took him 10 years to fulfill his dream.
Danilo, now 33, took a dip in the pool and started training at the age of 23 when he developed fondness for swimming.
"Swimming requires devotion, sacrifices and hours and hours of training to be able to master the techniques of each style and to become a better swimmer every day.
Danilo is a very disciplined and responsible person and this helped him with the rigorous process of 2 1/2 hours of training per day including weekends," Julieta said.
His passion for the sport grew until he became part of the Ladislawa Village swimming team and later the Monteritz.
Under the tutelage of coaches Edgardo Lora and Carlos Rodriguez, Danilo managed to learn the different swimming strokes.
Training Danilo, however, also posed a challenge for the coaches due to the language barrier since Danilo spoke Spanish.
Yet the patience of his coaches and Danilo's determination to become a better swimmer paid off, as he learned to speak English and it became easier for the coaches to train him.
His very supportive teammates also inspired him to excel in the sport.
"Me and the coaches always train Danilo the same as a regular swimmer.
No special treatment.
This is what we call inclusion in the society.
For the coaches, it will take more time with Danilo to train him, but there is no difference when we are in the pool," Julieta said.
Year 2013 became the breakout year for Danilo, as he tested his mettle in the Special Olympics Mindanao Games held in Cagayan de Oro City where he was able to dominate the competition.
This ultimately led him to earn the right to represent the country in the Special Olympics.
It also became apparent that his hard work made him one of the world's man to beat, as he blew past his competition in the M8 200-meter freestyle.
He clocked in at three minutes and 59.76 seconds -- way ahead of Costa Rica's silver medalist Luiz Ortiz who finished at 4:21.94 and bronze medalist Maximo Mejia at 6:57.72.
His close call in the M6 division 100-meter breaststroke and his bronze medal finish in the M4 100-meter butterfly, meanwhile, is now another motivation for Danilo, as he poised to win it all the next time around in dominating fashion.
But first, he has to ensure wins when he plunges into action in the 2015 Special Olympics Mindanao Games in Tagum City slated in October.
Danilo then advised his fellow special athletes, "Train very hard, concentrate and in the training you should also enjoy it."
James Infiesto, president of the Philippine Sports Association for the Differently-Abled -Davao, once said that sports is one of the powerful tools that can transcend one's disabilities and in the case of Danilo, he was able to do so but with an ample help from his family, friends and his own tenacity.
Tadeco: Playing a vital role in PH exports, Tadeco: Playing a vital role in PH exportsMAINTAINING high quality products is its utmost concern.
As it continues to play a vital role in the export industry, supplying top brands in the world market, the Tagum Agricultural Development Company, Inc.
 never stopped in coming up with new innovations to ensure freshness and quality of its produce from the farms to the tables of their clients.
The company, in fact, prides itself in using the most advanced technology and research in producing world-class cavendish bananas being exported to the world.
This has been an image attached to the company -- an image that Dabawenyos can always be proud of, considering the fact that Tadeco is a homegrown company being a subsidiary of the Floirendo-owned Anflo Group of Companies.
Last year, Tadeco was cited by a prestigious international award-giving body for its strong corporate social responsibility programs and good and responsible agricultural practices.
A feat that sets it apart from all other agriculture-based companies in the country.
Tadeco joined three other big agricultural companies from various parts of the world -- Kakuzi Limited from Kenya, Tropical Nordeste SA from Brazil, and Standard Fruit de Honduras from Honduras -- to be awarded with the 2014 GlobalG.A.P.
Good Agricultural Practice  award during a ceremony in Abu Dhabi, United Arad Emirates in October, last year.
These companies bested 40 others coming from the United States, Chile, Costa Rica, Ecuador, India, Egypt, Turkey, Japan, South Africa, Peru, Sri Lanka, Argentina, South Korea, France, Romania, China, Israel, New Zealand, United Arab Emirates, and Serbia for demonstrating high standards and excellent implementation of GlobalG.A.P.
principles in farms and production facilities.
The winners were judged based on their responsible water use and programs on increasing biodiversity, social responsibility, and role and involvement of women and youth.
"The award is a recognition of what Tadeco has been doing for a long time," said Reagan D.
Navarro, Tadeco manager for quality manangement systems, statistics and information management, and chemistry laboratory.
He was proud to say that even before such accomplishment, they have already adopted certain measures or practices on responsible use of water.
For instance, the company has been engaged in the recycle and treatment of water used for washing the bananas at the packing plants which was recycled in the same manner.
He said before they started practicing the recycling of water, 150 liters  of water had been used for each box of banana.

"Our water use went down from 150 L/box to 20 to 25 L/per box.
And one packing station can save up to 700 cubic meters  per day," Navarro said.
At present a water treatment system has already been installed at Tadeco's packing stations to continue saving water without compromising the quality of their produce.

In a bid to ensure food safety both in their plantation and production, Navarro said that they have invested in research and "strict biosecurity measures" in order to avoid banana diseases such as the panama disease and fusarium wilt to penetrate their plantation.
"We have a tire dip and foot bath at the entrances of the area in which the disinfectant used was studied by our researchers to really kill such diseases which comes from contaminated soil," he said.
Tadeco Plant Pathology and Tissue Culture department head Dennice G.
Catambacan, said in an earlier interview that they are continuing their researches on how to avoid such banana diseases once it contaminates their soil.

He said they also have a trial site where they are expanding their research.
Tadeco has also invested on the expansion of its research center and acquiring advance research equipment.
In terms of increasing biodiversity, social responsibility, and role and involvement of women and youth, Tadeco developed socio-economic programs to realize this -- the Sagip Kabuhayan, Sagip Kalusugan, Sagip Kaalaman, Sagip Kultura, Sagip Kalamidad, Sagip Kalikasan, Sagip Katuwang-Pamayanan and Sakip Pagpapahalagang Espiritwal.
Sagip Kabuhayan empowers non-working spouses and their dependents, through skills and capability trainings and seminars, enabling them to earn extra income for their family.
This covers the company's commitment to strengthen and empower women whose expertise are focused on pre-market delivery operations by employing them in the meticulous operations which require female abilities and expertise.

The women comprise 60% of the total manpower at the company's packing stations.

Through Sagip Kalusugan, healthy lifestyle among company employees and their families is given focus, promoting a work life balance.

Under its Sagip Kaalaman, Tadeco, in partnership with the AOF Foundation, donated several school buildings, provided school supplies and sponsored and advocated other education-related programs.
The company also grants full college education scholarships to qualified dependents with almost 100 scholars today and provides them employment opportunities after graduation.

Sagip Kalikasan is Tadeco's program commitment to the protection and securing of the environment.
Some activities they do include the Tree Growing Program, Coastal Clean-up Drive, maintaining diversified crops, wetlands, and reservoirs to preserve habitats of other species; usage of vermiculture or vermicomposting as a natural way of growing vegetables and other crops, employment of water-recycling facility in packing stations, and usage of Soil Moisture Balance Method, among others.
 
The lumad kids of Pag-amoma, The lumad kids of Pag-amomaRhealyn C.
Pojas, WHAT started as just a leisure activity led into an unexpected twist of fate for a group of orphaned lumad children who now became recording artists.
Exposure was never in their minds when they sing for fun at their new home at Robillo compound in Calinan, the so-called Pag-amoma Children's Place, where the children found refuge after being orphaned, neglected, or abandoned by their parents while the others belonged to broken families.

Though these children's story may what other people consider as sad or tragic however hope had been there constant companion towards their different journeys in life.

"Kanta-kanta lang ang amo, lingaw-lingaw lang.
Wala mi gahuna-huna og exposure ," said Lisa Templado, executive director of the Pag-amoma and the one who taught the children the proper voicing, the right tempo, blending and other important details relating to singing or music.
The lumad children composed of Manobo, Bagobo, Songkitin, and Ata Manobo tribes started out as Bangaw Chorale.
The word Bangaw means rainbow in English, according to Templado.
It was first established to help uplift the children from the discrimination they experienced through songs or singing.

The ages of the children range from 11 to 17 years old and they had been singing in schools during special occasions or programs and had been invited as guests at GMA2019s regional network in Davao even before they had their first album and had been invited to guest in a studio taping of ABS-CBN.
They had also been invited or recommended to sing or guests in various occasions such as during school programs, birthday celebrations, and church anniversaries.
They had also been able to sing twice in Manila, one of these was their participation for the Katutubo Exchange by the National Commission on Culture and the Arts .
They also performed in some malls in Davao City like the NCCC, SM, and was also able to perform at Pearl Farm.
Shiela Royo, now 16 years old and a Matigsalong Manobo, was one of the lumad children whose voice rings in their first album called the 201cTunog Bubongan.201d Royo, who was then eight years old when she came to the orphanage, recounted that her mother had sent her and her sister to the orphanage after the separation of their parents.
She said that her mother had nothing to raise them and that was the reason why they were sent to the Pag-amoma Children2019s Place.
Royo said that even in the mountains where they lived, they had been into singing since it is part of their culture.
Aside from that, they also do traditional or cultural dance and these happens during fiestas in their place.
Royo was one of the five lumad children who echoed the unheard voices of their fellow children in the mountains through the songs featured in their album.

201cNalipay mi kay pinaagi ana kay naa mi2019y matabangan nga mga lumad ,201d Royo expressed.
The proceeds of the album will be extended as help to the lumad children in the mountains.
The music album featured the songs Salugpongan, Bisan Kami Bata, and Batang Gagmay among others.

According to Executive Director Templado, the first set of the album2019s copies which were composed of about a thousand had already been sold and another batch of copies from the said album had been released just recently.
 
Though the children also dance and play stringed instruments like Bandoria, Octavina, and laod, they had been more known in their singing, Templado said.
As of the present, the children lived at the Pag-amoma Children2019s Home.
Some of them were already in High School while the others are in elementary.
King of Fruits: It's the season once again, King of Fruits: It's the season once againTHE name of this fruit is synonymous to Davao City itself.
Now that it's Kadayawan Festival, it's the season of ubiquitous durian touted as the "king of the fruits" once again.
Unfair it might seem, durian holds an unthinkable popularity for its foul odor; a notoriety that is distinct to only one fruit that grows abundantly on the rich plains of this beguiling city.
To some local tourists though, durian is not for the faint of heart, as it takes a lot of courage to get a taste of its meat that ranges in color from creamy white to yellow.
The pungent smell could be so discouraging, not to mention, unappealing that even the taste buds would refuse for a moment or two to fulfill its task in knowing the flavor before it even gets into the mouth.

But for the same reason as well, many tourists make sure that Davao's gastronomic adventure will not be complete without durian-tasting as part of its itinerary.

It is best done while getting lost on the busy streets at the height of the festival rush downtown.

Although durian stalls abound everywhere, ask the locals where to eat durian nearby.
Best to try each variety to know its different characteristics, from sweet to bittersweet and thick to creamy.

Just a word of caution though: if you have come to love durian, eat slowly, take one bite at a time, and savor its flavor, lest you suffer from high blood, they said.
There are also durian candies such as pastillas and yema to bring some home.
If you never wish to immerse in the festival heat, head north to SM Lanang Premier.
There, the fruit is aplenty at the 3rd Davao Durian Festival, located at the mall's Fountain Court.
The festival was opened last Friday and on-going until September 20, 2015.
To the benefit of the tourists, the Bureau of Plant and Industry  has put in place an exhibit should they want to learn the varieties that the non-picky few delight themselves with.

Among the exhibited varieties are the thornless ones, considered as the black sheep among the durian fruits.
What turned heads though are the durio graveolens, the red-fleshed durian that has a fruity taste while that of the orange-fleshed is a truce between tablea and tiesa.
If you think the city is awash with durian fruits, not yet.
Davao Durian Industry Council president Larry Miculob said bulk of the supply will come next month.

It's no brainer to understand the law of supply and demand, so good news for durian suckers! Expect the prices to go much cheaper in few weeks' time.
Camella's huge discounts this Kadayawan, Camella's huge discounts this KadayawanIN keeping with the festive spirit of the Kadayawan celebration, Camella Davao holds its own set of activities and promos to join in the festival2019s cheer.
201cCamella has always shown its support and active participation in the Kadayawan Festival, and this year is no different,201d said Anna Mae dela Pena, Camella Davao marketing head, adding that they have not only prepared fun activities for their guests and buyers, but also irresistible promo packages.
Camella will herald their celebration with a motorcade on Friday, followed by the opening of the bazaar showcasing premium goods and items on sale the whole day.
 The bazaar will be located at the parking area of the Camella offices at Delgar Building along JP Laurel Avenue in Bajada.
Exciting games and prizes await those who will drop by to join the festivities, especially homebuyers and guests.
 Vehicles plying JP Laurel can even stop over to get free stickers and other giveaways.
 
A dance contest dubbed 201cDamang-dama ang Saya201d will start at six in the evening.
201cOn top of all these exciting events are our unbeatable promos offered only during the Kadayawan Festival, such as a Kadayawan discount of up to P115,000 for a Camella Series house and P15,000 for a Lessandra house, both in Camella Davao,201d said dela Pena.

The Kadayawan discount further heats up with the slashing of as much as P100,000 in discount for Terrain houses in Cerritos Trails in Mintal.
 Dela Pena said they are not stopping there, adding that on top of the Kadayawan discount, homebuyers of these terrain houses also get a free balcony and carport.
201cThis Kadayawan, it is discounts galore for homebuyers of Camella homes, especially for those buying condo units at Liverpool, the fourth and tallest condominium tower of Northpoint,201d she said.
Liverpool2019s Kadayawan discount can go as high as P350,000, quite a windfall for homebuyers.
Making the deal sweeter for those who will make their purchases within August are free air-conditioning sets for Liverpool2019s condo units.
A two-bedroom condo will come with two air-conditioning units for free, while a studio unit gets one free air-conditioning unit.
With these Kadayawan treats, homebuyers will have more to be grateful for during this festival of thanksgiving when they take advantage of Camella2019s unmatchable discounts, easy-on-the-pocket financing schemes, and giveaways.
201cWe want people to feel the Kadayawan spirit through Camella by extending to them these Kadayawan promos,201d Dela said.
Camella2019s promos for the Kadayawan Festival last year were snatched up by homebuyers who wanted to take advantage of the discounts and achieve their dream of living in a well-appointed Camella community.
Camella Davao is a subsidiary of the country2019s largest homebuilder, Vista Land & Lifescapes that has built over 250,000 homes all over the country in over 35 years.
All inquiries are welcome at 2/F Delgar Building, J.P.
Laurel Ave., Davao City, or give them a call at 226-3100, email at vismin@camella.com.ph, or check out their website www.camella.com.ph.

The Kadayawan through the years , The Kadayawan through the years Nelson C.
Bagaforo, A SPECTACULAR street dancing, a colorful parade of florally-dressed floats of various shapes and sizes, a food and musical extravaganza -- these are just few of highlights of this year's celebration of Kadayawan sa Dabaw.
Thousands of local and foreign tourists flock Davao City to celebrate with Dabawenyos a fun-filled festival, which depicts Davao's rich cultural heritage.
Its remarkable success in the past made it at par with all other festivals in the country, such as Sinulog in Cebu, Ati-Atihan in Aklan and and Dinagyang in Iloilo.
Kadayawan has been touted as Mindanao's Festival of Festivals.
In fact, it is one among the Philippine festivals being promoted to the world by the Department of Tourism.
Kadayawan, indeed, is an attraction.
What used to be a cultural rite, where ethnic tribes around Mt.
Apo usually gathered during harvest-time to give thanks to their gods especially the all powerful Bathala  for a bountiful harvest, has metamorphosed into the biggest festivbal on the island.
It has transformed into a festival, not only of thanksgiving, but to honor Davao's rich heritage, its past personified by lumads and its people and to promote Davao City as an investment haven where lumads, Christians and Muslims co-exist in harmony.
All these can be witnessed through various activities and events, depicting the city's rich and colorful culture.
The thanksgiving festival was institutionalized in 1986 to unite Dabawenyos after the turbulent Martial Law years.
It was then called 201cApo Duwaling,201d a contraction of the famous icons of the city, namely Mt.
Apo, durian and waling-waling.
Two years later, it was renamed 201cKadayawan sa Dabaw201d to better reflect the merry spirit and indigenous theme of the celebration.
Dayao, the root word of kadayawan, is a Dabawnon meaning good.
Its derivative Madayaw is an all-positive lumad word that connotes happiness, beauty, bounty festivity, and good fortune.
Each year, the festival has grown bigger and more spectacular, marked by street dancing, floral float parade, agro-industrial trade fair, cultural shows and food festival.
A milestone in Kadayawan celebrations is the live coverage of the festivities and beamed live all over the world, giving Davao City a positive exposure and big media mileage.
To be featured live before an international audience is Indak-Indak sa Kadalanan on Saturday and the Floral Float Parade on Sunday.
These two highlight events serve as the main attraction of the festival.
The Floral Float Parade, a colorful parade of florally-dressed floats of various shapes and sizes and adorned with thousands of flowers, fruit and fresh produce in wild abundance, will also be beamed live to world TV audience.
Viewers will surely be amazed by a deluge of flora and fauna in the region, thriving amidst forests and marshes protected by mountains and fertile land.

The Indak-Indak, on the other hand, features various delegation from all over Mindanao competing in the street dancing competition.
City malls, stars heat up Kadayawan, City malls, stars heat up KadayawanNelson C.
Bagaforo, KADAYAWAN is synonymous to "great sales" that Davao City's shopping malls have embarked on as their own way to celebrate the Festival of Festivals.
Every year, shoppers have the chance to avail of big discounts on their favorite stuffs -- from ready-to-wear items to appliances and furniture.
Expect the city's big malls -- Abreeza of the Ayala Malls, SM Lanang Premier, SM City Davao, NCCC Mall of Davao, Felcris Centrale, Gaisano Mall of Davao, Victoria Mall and Gaisano City Mall, among others -- to be fillep up with shoppers who have been waiting for these "big sales."
While at it, malls also prepapre entertainment events during the week-long Kadayawan, including mall shows graced by big showbiz personalities.
Abreeza Mall gears up for a massive Kadayawan celebration with showbiz's brightest celebrities set to take the stage, in addition to a mall-wide sale, a major shopping promo, and different pocket events all meant to honor Davao City's biggest annual festivity.
On August 21 at 4 p.m, the stars of ABS-CBN's Asap 20 will be livening up the Activity Center; namely, Maja Salvador, Sam Milby, Rayver Cruz, Erik Santos, Daryl Ong, Sofia Andres, Bryan Termulo, Alexa Ilacad, and Nash Aguas.

On August 22 at 5 p.m., it's singing superstar Zsa Zsa Padilla's turn to entertain Dabawenyos with a musical performance.

On August 23 at 3 p.m., The Rich Man's Daughter stars Rhian Ramos and Mike Tan and Kapuso talent Mikael Daez will be bringing the GMA Kapuso Mall Show to the Activity Center.
All celebrity shows are free admission.
Abreeza Mall is a major shopping haven until August 23 while the mall-wide Kadayawan Sale runs, with mall merchants offering discounts of up to 70% off.

Also running until August 23 is the Kadayawan Shopaholic Challenge, where shopping sprees worth a total of P100,000 are up for grabs: Seven winners will take home Ayala Malls electronic gift certificates worth P10,000 each, and one winner walks away with an electronic gift certificate worth P30,000.
The electronic gift certificates work like a debit card and are valid for use at participating Abreeza Mall merchants with BPI terminals.
T
o participate in the Kadayawan Shopaholic Challenge, shoppers must collect stamps by presenting single or accumulated receipts corresponding to merchant categories and purchase requirements indicated on the promo coupon.
A total of five stamps per coupon are required to enter the raffle.
For inquiries, shoppers may visit the Kadayawan Shopaholic Challenge booth near the Main Concierge at the Ground Floor.
Kadayawan revelers will enjoy a combination of great music, grilled delights, and good times at Kasadya Nights at the Third Floor Roof Garden from August 20 to 23 at 6 p.m.
YouTube sensation Jireh Lim will be dishing out his hit songs on August 21, while local acts Thea Pitogo, Gap 69, and Negative Four will take the stage on August 20, 22, and 23, respectively.
The NCCC Mall of Davao also has its Kadayawan Sale from August 14 to 23.
The mall also stages the Katuwaan at Musikahan sa Kadayawan 2015 on August 22 with PBB All-In's former housemates Loisa Andalio & Joshua Garcia and Manolo Pedrosa & Maris Racal.
On August 23, the mall features the Voice PH Season 2 Grand champion Jason Dy, together with Marco Gumabao, CJ Navato, Miles Ocampo, JM De Guzman and Michelle Vito.
Meanwhile, ASAP's newest boy group, "Harana," with Joseph Marco, Marlo Mortel, Bryan Santos and Michael Pangilinan heats up Kadayawan at SM City Davao on August 23.
Harana's single, Number One, is part of the OPM Fresh Album which is an exclusive compilation of the newest and the freshest artists from Star Music.

The group of teen heartthrobs also recorded the theme song of the movie "You're My Boss." With good looks and charm, the quartet will surely make every young Davaoe\xf1a2019s heart beat fast.
Shop at SM City Davao and get a VIP seat with every purchase of at least P1,000.
Take a photo with the Harana Boys with a purchase of their album.
Albums will be available onsite.
Also at SM City Davao this Kadayawan season, catch Marimar stars Megan Young and Tom Rodriguez on August 21, as well as the cast of Pasion de Amor and Coco Martin on August 22 at the Kapamilya Karavan.

Tadeco: Playing a vital role in PH exports, Tadeco: Playing a vital role in PH exportsNelson C.
Bagaforo, MAINTAINING high quality products is its utmost concern.
As it continues to play a vital role in the export industry, supplying top brands in the world market, the Tagum Agricultural Development Company, Inc.
 never stopped in coming up with new innovations to ensure freshness and quality of its produce from the farms to the tables of their clients.
The company, in fact, prides itself in using the most advanced technology and research in producing world-class cavendish bananas being exported to the world.
This has been an image attached to the company -- an image that Dabawenyos can always be proud of, considering the fact that Tadeco is a homegrown company being a subsidiary of the Floirendo-owned Anflo Group of Companies.
Last year, Tadeco was cited by a prestigious international award-giving body for its strong corporate social responsibility programs and good and responsible agricultural practices.
A feat that sets it apart from all other agriculture-based companies in the country.
Tadeco joined three other big agricultural companies from various parts of the world -- Kakuzi Limited from Kenya, Tropical Nordeste SA from Brazil, and Standard Fruit de Honduras from Honduras -- to be awarded with the 2014 GlobalG.A.P.
Good Agricultural Practice  award during a ceremony in Abu Dhabi, United Arad Emirates in October, last year.
These companies bested 40 others coming from the United States, Chile, Costa Rica, Ecuador, India, Egypt, Turkey, Japan, South Africa, Peru, Sri Lanka, Argentina, South Korea, France, Romania, China, Israel, New Zealand, United Arab Emirates, and Serbia for demonstrating high standards and excellent implementation of Global G.A.P.
principles in farms and production facilities.
The winners were judged based on their responsible water use and programs on increasing biodiversity, social responsibility, and role and involvement of women and youth.
"The award is a recognition of what Tadeco has been doing for a long time," said Reagan D.
Navarro, Tadeco manager for quality manangement systems, statistics and information management, and chemistry laboratory.
He was proud to say that even before such accomplishment, they have already adopted certain measures or practices on responsible use of water.
For instance, the company has been engaged in the recycle and treatment of water used for washing the bananas at the packing plants which was recycled in the same manner.
He said before they started practicing the recycling of water, 150 liters  of water had been used for each box of banana.
 
"Our water use went down from 150 L/box to 20 to 25 L/per box.
And one packing station can save up to 700 cubic meters  per day," Navarro said.
At present a water treatment system has already been installed at Tadeco's packing stations to continue saving water without compromising the quality of their produce.

In a bid to ensure food safety both in their plantation and production, Navarro said that they have invested in research and "strict biosecurity measures" in order to avoid banana diseases such as the panama disease and fusarium wilt to penetrate their plantation.
"We have a tire dip and foot bath at the entrances of the area in which the disinfectant used was studied by our researchers to really kill such diseases which comes from contaminated soil," he said.
Tadeco Plant Pathology and Tissue Culture department head Dennice G.
Catambacan, said in an earlier interview that they are continuing their researches on how to avoid such banana diseases once it contaminates their soil.

He said they also have a trial site where they are expanding their research.
Tadeco has also invested on the expansion of its research center and acquiring advance research equipment.
In terms of increasing biodiversity, social responsibility, and role and involvement of women and youth, Tadeco developed socio-economic programs to realize this -- the Sagip Kabuhayan, Sagip Kalusugan, Sagip Kaalaman, Sagip Kultura, Sagip Kalamidad, Sagip Kalikasan, Sagip Katuwang-Pamayanan and Sakip Pagpapahalagang Espiritwal.
Sagip Kabuhayan empowers non-working spouses and their dependents, through skills and capability trainings and seminars, enabling them to earn extra income for their family.
This covers the company's commitment to strengthen and empower women whose expertise are focused on pre-market delivery operations by employing them in the meticulous operations which require female abilities and expertise.

The women comprise 60% of the total manpower at the company's packing stations.

Through Sagip Kalusugan, healthy lifestyle among company employees and their families is given focus, promoting a work life balance.

Under its Sagip Kaalaman, Tadeco, in partnership with the AOF Foundation, donated several school buildings, provided school supplies and sponsored and advocated other education-related programs.
The company also grants full college education scholarships to qualified dependents with almost 100 scholars today and provides them employment opportunities after graduation.

Sagip Kalikasan is Tadeco's program commitment to the protection and securing of the environment.
Some activities they do include the Tree Growing Program, Coastal Clean-up Drive, maintaining diversified crops, wetlands, and reservoirs to preserve habitats of other species; usage of vermiculture or vermicomposting as a natural way of growing vegetables and other crops, employment of water-recycling facility in packing stations, and usage of Soil Moisture Balance Method, among others.

Elevating the city as world-class travel destination, Elevating the city as world-class travel destinationNelson C.
Bagaforo, PROPERTY developer Torre Lorenzo Development Corp.
 is bent on transforming Davao City as the next world-class travel destination in the country as it pursues the development of its master planned projects in the city.
The company, in fact, wants to be a major player in the city's growing economy and seeks to contribute to its growth -- particularly in the tourism industry -- with the development of its two flagship projects - Ciudades and Siam 8000.
These projects are a testament to the company's vow of renewed commitment to deliver world-class and quality real-estate products to its growing clientele.
As what Tomas P.
Lorenzo, TLDC president, said during an Investors Night in Davao City recently: "We are renewing our commitment in delivering master planned communities composed of focused communities, city and township communities, leisure communities to our growing and expanding market."
"We are ready to go up," he said.
For instance, Lorenzo said that Siam 8000, which will be developed in three years, will house residential towers and hotel, which will be operated by international hospitality brand Dusit International.

This mixed-used development will rise on Maryknoll Drive in Bo.
Pampanga and expected to set the tone for future developments in the city.
The project will also elevate the city as a world-class travel destination where Dabawenyos and guests can enjoy deluxe accommodations that accentuate what the city has to offer.
The project has four components, but TLDC at present is focusing on the construction of two projects, the 168-unit Dusit Thani Residences and the 120-room Dusit D2 Hotel.
The first to rise is the P2 billion Dusit Thani Residences, which is the latest project of TLDC in partnership with Dusit International.
The condominium tower will rise on a 1.2 hectare portion of Siam 8000.
Dusit Thani Residences features concierge service, in-room dining, 24-hour security, housekeeping, exterior and in-room maintenance, and courier and transportation services.
The residential unit will also feature a spa and wellness center, swimming pool, specialty restaurants, business center, meeting rooms, and conference facilities, among others.
"Davao's thriving tourism industry bodes well for the property sector as there is a rise in demand for luxury real estate presence.
The company recognizes that there's never been a better time than now to capitalize on Davao, the gateway to Southern Philippines, while its tourism and real estate activities show no signs of slowing down," Lorenzo said.
Ryan Chen, Dusit international director of development for Asia Pacific, also said they are confident that their projects will further boost the city's growth.
He noted that the projects are set to open job opportunities for hotel staff and crew who will be trained by Dusit International.

"Dusit will be primarily tapping the local labor force to service the properties in line with our global quality standards.
We will also be entering into contracts for linen, food and other supplies needed in the day-to-day business of managing a hotel," he said.
With the entry of the seluxury projects, Davao entrepreneurs could expect to cater to a more diversified tourist population that will include those with high-end preferences.
Dusit International earlier announced that Davao is host to the first Dusit Thani Residences in Asia, as the company's other serviced apartments are located in Dubai and Abu Dhabi.

The property is scheduled for turnover in 2018.
It is designed with the security and well-being of its guests in mind, featuring a centralized theater for its amenities, as well as thoughtfully designed landscapes and gardens that create a sense of relaxation for its users.
Meanwhile, dusitD2 Hotel is Dusit International's brand of contemporary and casual accommodations for the savvy, stylish traveler.
The hotel will feature high-tech and modern conveniences coupled with chic and playful design that matches the city's youthful vibe.
This will be the first dusitD2 Hotel in the Philippines.
On the other hand, Ciudades, the first large-scale integrated mixed-use masterplanned township development in Davao City, will rise on a 250-hectare property that is composed of five subdivisions, two schools, commercial areas, and an industrial park.
Lorenzo said they are planning to put up a hospital and a football stadium "to rival that of the Rizal Memorial Sports Complex" in Manila.
A public safety command center will also be set up at Ciudades.

Lumadnong Dula: Showcase of life, culture, Lumadnong Dula: Showcase of life, cultureMarianne L.
Saberon-Abalayan, ON Friday, August 20, is a special day for Davao City's indigenous peoples  as the 30th Kadayawan sa Dabaw 2nd Lumadnong Dula unfurls at the People's Park.
Some 250 participants from five of the city's 11 tribes - Ata of Paquibato District, Klata of Calinan, Matigsalog from part of Marilog, Tagabawa of Toril and Ovu-Manuvo of Marilog will vie for honors in the one-day P580,000 sportsfest presented by the city government of Davao through the Sports Development Division of the City Mayor's Office .
Datu Rudy Mande of Matigsalog Tribe, during Thursday's Davao Sportswriters Association  Forum at the NCCC Mall Davao Food Cove function hall, said: "Kining Lumadnong Dula mura ni sya'g reunion namo.
Sa opening dunay mga rituals pakahimuon ang mga kauban natong lumads para mas mapakita kon unsa jud ang kultura namo ug among panginabuhi sa tagsa-tagsa namong mga tribo (The tribal games serves as a reunion for us.
There will be rituals in the opening ceremonies where our fellow lumads will showcase the life and culture of our tribes)."
From 20 tribal events, he said that only 12 common ones will be played.
These are male pana , male sasalid , sisibow , kakasing ,  male and female dagan , female sosakoro/ panikado , mixed bibinayo , totaringki/paning , male solopot , female siklot , bubuntug , aakow/karang relay, male bobadsog/babadsang , dayanghoy , baklid  and tug of war using a 20-meter long abaca rope.
Tagabawa Tribe's Datu Jonathan Awing, meanwhile, added, "Kining padula isa ni sa pinaagi nga magtapok taga tribo, nga mailhan mi sa siyudad sa Davao ."
The tribal games is also in line with the city's observation of the International Day of the World's Indigenous Peoples  held in August every year.
It was on Sept.
13, 2007 that the General Assembly of the United Nations adopted the declaration of the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.
Real value for money at Matina Enclaves, Real value for money at Matina EnclavesVALUE for money is anybody's wish.
Thus, investing in real estate needs a lot of wise thinking.
At Matina Enclaves, a project owned by Davao City's newest homegrown real estate developer Escandor Development Corporation , real value is what an investor gets.
Esdevco president and CEO Glenn Escandor, in a recent launching of the Matina Enclaves  VIP Card, which offers perks and privileges from partner establishments also owned by the Escandor family, said: ""Here in Esdevco we believe in the saying that `price is what you pay for and value is what you get'.
I assure you that your investment into our project  is a choice you will not regret because we have done nothing in the past years, but deliver you impeccable value."
The Escandor family also owns The Royal Mandaya Hotel, Davao Security & Investigation Agency, Inc.
, Globe , Mesa restaurants in Davao and Brothers Burgers , among others.
Matina Enclaves project director Gerald M.
Garces said, "We give investors and home buyers the best option.
The comfort of accessibility, being located just near malls and schools yet not too close to worry about traffic and pollution; of a relaxing environment and top-notch amenities; and of quality housing and condo units that provide exclusive cosmpolitan and leisure living for its residents.
All these at reasonable prices."     
The 5.3-hectare development, which is tucked along Quimpo Boulevard in Matina and just across Matina Golf Club, is so strategically located and is safe for residence as it is not located near a river that may pose flooding problems or by the hillside that may trigger landslides.
"Matina Enclaves is just the perfect location and a wise investment that will generate more value over time.
Now, that's real value for money," Garces said.
Matina Enclaves offers three residential options: The Plains - open lot development; The Courtyard - house and lot units; and The Enclaves Residences - medium rise condominium with six proposed buildings.
In a period of six months after its launch, The Plains and The Courtyard were sold out.
In six months, Building 1 of The Enclaves Residences building was fully sold out after its launch.
Today, a few months after its launch, Building 2 is already almost 70 percent sold.
The already constructed Matina Enclaves' amenity area, two-storey clubhouse called CAME  features a gym, kids' playroom, function / meeting room and function hall for up to 150 persons.
Construction of the 25-meter lapping and kiddie pools and basketball court are ongoing.
For inquiries, visit the Sales Office and Showroom at Unit 11 Genesis Arcade, Ecowest Drive or contact  2857059, 0932-1200497 or 0922-8177305.

Black Nazarene replica at DECA Homes Esperanza, Black Nazarene replica at DECA Homes EsperanzaNOW, devotees need not go to Quiapo Church to see the image of the Black Nazarene.
Right at the heart of DECA Homes Esperanza  in Barangay Tigatto, Mandug, in Buhangin District of Davao City, a Black Nazarene replica that came all the way from Quiapo Church was installed at DHE's Our Lady of Pe\xf1afrancia Chapel by Bishop George Rimando on August 18, 2015.
Mary Ann Tacay Chua, 8990 Housing Development Corporation general manager, said over 600 DECA homebuyers and residents of
neighboring communities and those from the city filled up the chapel.
After the Mass, devotees of the Black Nazarene were given the chance to wipe the body parts of the image with their handkerchiefs with the assistance of the Knights of Columbus.
Chua said, "According to Bishop Rimando, what 8990 HDC built is not actually a chapel but a church.
He was very much surprised on the size of our chapel."
She thanked Msgr.
Clem Ignacio, the Parish Priest of Quiapo Church, for his kindness and generosity in sharing the replica of the Black
Nazarene to the city of Davao.
"We are very much honored because the chosen permanent house of the Black Nazarene is the ones 8990 HDC built and that is the chapel named in honor of Our Lady of Pe\xf1afrancia.
The chapel is open to all devotees.
On Friday, Aug.
21, at 6 p.m, the first novena will be held and from then on regular novenas will be conducted on succeeding Fridays.
We are inviting all the devotees of the Black Nazarene to join us.
Now, we need not go to Quiapo Church to see the image and pray because we now have the replica in our very own Davao City," Chua said.
She also thanked the Gagmay na Kristohanong Katilingban  of DECA Homes Esperanza and GKK of Brgy.
Mandug for the success of the installation of the Black Nazarene and 8990 HDC president and CEO Jesus B.
Atencio who is very supportive in the implementation of the activity.
Atencio has always said, "It's most fulfilling to see that we are transforming lives for the better - from our homebuyers, suppliers, contractors, marketing group and entire staff.
I believe in God's grace, lahat ay biyaya ng Diyos at hindi dapat ipagdamot.
Therefore, always share."
The success of 8990 HDC is their corporate social response; making sure that the company is not only providing decent and affordable
housing units to their homebuyers but making them a vibrant community by way of spiritual enrichment.
Indeed, the veteran mass housing developer is a trail blazer in mass housing development with the community it serves at its very heart.
Depicting lumads' tradition thru songs and dances, Depicting lumads' tradition thru songs and dancesKarina V.
Canedo, MUSIC and dance competitions and performances during this year's 30th  Kadayawan Festival will feature the beauty of culture, arts and tradition of Mindanao's indigenous people.
These much waited competitions once again inspire us to delve on the richness of our culture and tradition.
These are the Tunog Mindanao and Sayaw Mindanao.
The Tunog Mindanao is a yearly musical competition that integrates local instruments with contemporary  or world music.
It is open to all Mindanao based musicians and enthusiasts.
James Zimmerman, one of the organizers of the event, said that what makes the Tunog Mindanao unique is that the songs can be sung in Filipino or other dialects.
 
Major requirements set for each entry is that it should have a clean music, with no distortion and alterations unlike pop or rock music.
 Gadgets or any devices that can change the original sound of the instrument are discouraged as the original sound of the instruments should be retained.
The songs must be also be an original composition which is not played or recorded anywhere else and Indigenous and contemporary instruments can be used.
This year's Tunog Mindanao is unique because it will be the first time that the final performances will be availed by the public live at San Pedro Street.
Meanwhile, Popong Landero, singer and also one of the current organizer of Tunog Mindanao said that the winning pieces and other pieces of the finalists will be archived at the City Tourism2019s office.
Another much awaited competition for the Kadayawan event is the Sayaw Mindanao.
According to Edmund Superada, the chair of the event, Sayaw Mindanao is an indoor Mindanao  dance competition of theatrical and tribal suites of dance and music, depicting Mindanaoan epics, folklores and tradition.
The competition is open for all dance groups of students, out of school youth and community based performers all over Davao.
Sayaw Mindanao is designed to preserve and promote the Mindanao2019s tangible and intangible cultural heritage and to promote Davao city as the center for cultural heritage.

201cIt is a venue and opportunity for you artist to promote culture of Mindanao not only in davao city but entire Mindanao because some of the participants are coming from other provinces.201d Superada said.
Meanwhile another dance showcase that you should set your eyes on is the Lumandnong Bantawan, this is a showcase of  major 11 tribes sa Davao city.
The tribes will have an eight-minute time allotment will showcase their music, dances and other rituals.

Oca Casaysay one of the organizers of the event said that this event is one way of knowing the life and culture of the tribes.
Unique and unrivaled cultural richness, Unique and unrivaled cultural richnessSHOWCASING each tribe's unique and unrivaled cultural richness and preserving traditions and beliefs amid the rapid changes in present day society are no easy tasks.

But having the kind of commitment and willingness to fulfill that role, keeps the future brighter for the next generation of their tribes and for the country as well.
Iranun tribe has recently been recognized as the 11th tribe in Davao City by the National Commission for Culture and the Arts .
The Iranun tribe led by Datu Pamikiren Latip "PJ" P.
A.
Arumpac Jr., as the tribe's deputy mayor, presently inhabits the area bordering Lanao del Sur and Maguindanao, also believed to be the origin of these two ethnic groups.
The Iranun tongue is also strongly believed to be the origin of the language of the Maranao and Maguindanao.
Iranuns are known to be excellent in sea explorations having inhabited near the Sulu Sea, Moro gulf, and Celebes Sea.
For the Matigsalug tribe, although commonly reffered as part of the Manobo tribe, has an estimated 147,000 in population.
The Matigsalug, which means "people living along the Salug River or Davao River, are said to be inhabited in some areas in San Fernando in Bukidnon and Marilog District.
Matigsalug's rich culture are oftenly showed in the bright-colored outfits that they were including their way expressing themselves through songs, dances, poetry, and spiritual expressions.
Meanwhile, the selection of the leader or datu of the Manobo tribe is normally placed on the skilled and socially powerful individual through the alliances and partnership he had garnered.
Production of different crops including rice, corn, legume, yams, and sweet potatoes has been the tribe's source of living, mainly into agriculture culture while being backed up by hunting and other source of food gathering.
The unique characteristic of Maguindanawon tribesmen is their ability to adapt in marshland.
Maguindanawon are more into arts and crafts as they are more specialized in weaving and metalworking which shows their distinct ethnic character.
The Maranaos are still moving from Davao City to the Lanao provinces.
 
They are also noted in the aspect of weaving and metal craft.
But their biggest contribution in the Philippine architecture is the construction of a torogan or their "place for sleeping."
Maranao textiles are also famous for their very ornate designs and colors that reflects the present state of person using it.

The Tausug tribe hails from the extreme southern parts of the Mindanao Island where the religion they practice is Islam.

Tausug tribe still practices the traditional structure where there is a sultanate.
The sultan will be the head of all rans within the sultanate while replacement of the sultan will be based on the election done by his staff but can also be chosen among his bloodline.
Trade is the popular occupation for most of the Tausug members.
Sama tribesmen, on the other hand, uses music as a means to express themselves and their emotions towards another person or to their supreme being.
They use various kind of instruments particularly the agong, gimba, koglong, and among others.
In terms of practicing rituals among the Sama tribe, the balyan performs the ritual dances that are usually performed in different circumstances like dance of happines, dance of sickness, and others.
For the Ovu-Manobo tribe, most of them are circulated in Agusan, Bukidnon, Cotabato, Davao, Misamis Oriental, and Surigao del Sur.
Ovu-Manobo also uses weaponry and jewelries as they believe that all of these possess souls.

Inspiring their own tribe, Inspiring their own tribeKarlo Paolo R.
Pates, IT takes a lot of effort to preserve one's culture -- the tradition, beliefs, and even their very own dialect.
But all 11 beautiful ladies from 11 major ethnic tribes in Davao City who are vying for this year's Hiyas sa Kadayawan title are all determined to do so.
Tausog, Maguindanao, Maranao, Kagan and Sama, Ata, Matigsalug, Klata-Djangan, Tagabawa, Ovu-Manovo, and Iranun tribes are entered in this year's competition whom the equally talented and smart candidates vow to bring honor and prestige to their own tribe.

For Aj Ruth H.
Sumandang, who represents the the Ovu Manubo tribe, said she will make use of the opportunity of this year's event to be an inspiration to her fellow tribesmen for preservation of their rich cultural background of their tribe.
"Isa ka blessing ning Hiyas ng Kadayawan prepared by the City government of Davao.
We can preseve our cultures and traditions by organizing activities that can inform the young generations how rich our culture is.," said Sumandang during the presentation of the candidates recently at the I-Speak Media Forum.
But Sumandang was also quick to add that her tribesmen should not forget their tribes culture amid the trying changes in the development in the society.
"We should not forget to preserve our culture because that who we are and it's our identity.
If given the chance and opportunity to do so, then I will do my best to enforce it," Sumandang said.
Myra D.
Calihim, of the Kagan Tribe, said educational awareness is key in the challenge in preserving their culture.
"Educational awareness about our culture.
It's a reminder to all of us that we are now is our greatest debt to our cultures and to our ancestors," Calihim said.
Haifan Rica B.
Bansilan of the Maguindanawon tribe, however, bared that no influences would let them turn their back from the culture they've been used to from the previous years.
"We can preseve our culture by its continuous practice.
Despite being influenced by the new aspects of development particularly by technology, I make it to a point to remember my roots, ancestors, and the tribe that I came from," Bansilan said in the vernacular.
"Ipagmalaki namo ang among tribu and kung asa mi gikan," said Sitti Sara Sakkam of the Tausug tribe.
Michelle D.
Ansal, who takes pride as a member of the Bagobo-Klata tribe, said: "There is a hope to preserve our culture through education as it provide awareness to the people, to the community, and to every child.
Through education we can learn about the culture, religion, and even the traditions of every tribe in Davao City.
"As a teacher in profession, it inspire me to do voluntary work especially in our tribe.
I teach them the language, lifestyle, traits and everything about our tribe and other tribes as well," Ansal added.
Flormea D.
Manyawron of the Ata tribe, also shared that the same sentiments that there is a need for the non-stop practice of their cultures and tradition for them to reminded what they came from.
"In order to preserve culture and tradition, by using the dialect everyday in our family and every households.
Ipadayon namo unsa ang nasugdan sa among mga ancestors before."
Haida Dawn J.
Ainin of the Sama tribe, said her participation in the competition is more centered with her as a role model to her tribesmen.
"I want to be the role model for our tribe so that our cultures and traditions will not be forgetten.
It's our way to appreciate our own tribe by inspiring and enriching them about who we are," Ainin said.
As for Rechel B.
Dumalag of the Matigsalog tribe, she wanted to teach for fellow tribesmen to love their own culture and not be swayed by the advancement of the technology.
"Turuan ko sila na hindi nila ikahiya ang tribe and cultura nila.
Hindi dapat nila ikahiya kung ano sila," Dumalag said.
For Alamaida Casanguan Agasor of the Iranun tribe, she said that her will is to preserve their tribes culture in honor of their ancestors who passed on the traditions to their generation and instead to the same to the next offsprings.

"Hinding-hindi ko po kakalimutan yung mga tradition namin noon na itinuro sa aming ng aming mga ninuno.
Ipagpapatuloy ko po iyon at hindi ko gagaya sa ibang kabataan na naimpluwenyahan ng makabagong technolohiya," Agasor said.
Fatma Jaheema Malatus of the Maranao tribe, also said that they need to preserve their culture for their future generations to be able to experience it.
"Kelangan itong alagaan ang kultura at tradisyon dahil bigay ito ng ating ninuno."
Wenallie Ivy A.
Atan of the Bagobo-Tagabawa tribe, was also quick to answer by saying,:"I want our fellow tribesmen to continue to preserve our cultures and tradition.
We should be passionate in preserving a culture." 
The coronation night of Hiyas sa Kadayawan is set on August 21 at the Almendras Gym Davao City Recreation Center .
Sun.Star celebrates Kadayawan, Sun.Star celebrates KadayawanKriztja Marae G.
Labrador, ALSO in a festive mood with its upcoming 20th anniversary celebration this September, Sun.Star Davao will be participating for the first time during the 30th Kadayawan Festival2019s Pamulak Kadayawan or the Floral Float Parade.
Pamulak sa Kadayawan is the annual parade of florally-dressed floats of various shapes and sizes, showcasing the abundant vegetation of the Davao Region.
Sun.Star Davao's floral float which is set to parade the city2019s streets on August 23 under the non-competing category will feature the publication2019s anniversary logo in a sun figure and its iconic newsboy raising a newspaper while riding a bicycle.
The float created and designed by Hazel Pernes Basarte, will be mostly featuring the colors yellow and blue, which mainly represents the whole Sun.Star chain of newspapers.
For years now, Sun.Star Davao has consistently covered all the major events for Kadayawan Festival in the city and has been releasing its annual Supplement feature for the event.
A showcase not only of beauty, but rich culture, A showcase not only of beauty, but rich cultureChristine Joice C.
Cudis, HIYAS ng Kadayawan is not just a platform for beauty competition of the 11 candidates represnting their respective tribs, but a display of their rich culture.
As what Councilor Al Ryan Alejandre, Kadayawan sa Dabaw 2015 spokesperson said: "This is not a beauty contest.
This is a presentation of the 11 tribes through one individual."
Alejandre said the search is for Dabawenyos to recognize and appreciate the ways of living and being of the first settlers of the metropolis.
The event aims to make the audience realize that their lineage still exists, their system of living is still practiced even by the modern generation, and that it will still continue for the next years to come.
Some of the candidates shared their reasons and goals in joining the search.
Rechel Dumalag, from the Matigsalog tribe, said "Gusto nako ipakita sa katawhan ang akoang paghigugma sa akoang tribu ug proud ko nga usa ako ka Matigsalug ".
Alamaida Agasor, of the Iranun Tribe said: "Ipapakita ko po ang aking kultura bilang dugong Iranon.
Ang adbokasiya ko ay ang maiparating sa kabataan na buhay pa ang aming kultura at hindi dapat baguhin ng makabagong teknolohiya ang isang tao."
Flormea D.
Manyawron, of the Ata Tribe, said: "Our tribe covers meaningful practices that give life to the community by preserving, protecting, and valuing our environment.
I want to show the people what we contribute to the community and I am proud that our culture and values are still intact."
Michelle Ansal of the Bagobo-Klata Tribe, for her part, sees education as a way to alleviate the lives of her folk, 201cI am pushing on the literacy of children.
Mahirap para sa isang bata ang hindi makapag-aral dahil kung walang education, walang awareness, walang cultural identity."
Haifa Rica Bansilan, from the Maguindanaoan Tribe said: "Gusto kong i-share sa Philippines na ang mga negative story about our place is not all that Maguindanao has.They should discover that the people living there are kind and hospitable." 
The annual parade of beauty and talent will take place at Davao City Recreation Center on August 21, starting at 6 p.m.
Here's the complete list of Hiyas 2015 candidates and the respective tribe they respresent:
Aj Ruth H.
Sumandang of the Ovu Manubo Tribe
Myra D.
Calihim of the Kagan Tribe
Haifa Rica B.
Bansilan of the Maguindanaon Tribe
Sitti Sara Sakkam of the Tausug Tribe
Michelle G.
Ansal of the Bagobo-Klata Tribe
Flormea D.
Manyawron of the Ata Tribe
Haida Dawn J.
Ainin of the Sama Tribe
Rechel B.
Dumalag of the Matigsalog Tribe
Alamaida Casanguan Agasor of the Iranun Tribe
Fatma Jaheema Malatus of the Maranao Tribe
Wenallie Ivy A.
Atan of the Bagobo-Tagabawa Tribe.

Dawaw River: The seat of Davao civilization, Dawaw River: The seat of Davao civilizationChristine Joice C.
Cudis, THE Davao River Festival will once again kick off the celebration of the Indigenous People's Day on August 21, starting at 7 a.m.
at Tionko Soccer Field.
Davao City's 11 tribes -- Ata, Matigsalug, Ovu-Manuvo, Klata Djangan, Tagabawa, Tausog, Maguindanaon, Maranao, Kagan, Sama, and Iranun -- will once again put to life their good olden days with what they called then as Dawow River.
The tribes on board their decorated boats will parade from Bankerohan river bank to Tionko field with festive music and graceful movements by each ethnic groups.
It is staged to honor the days of the past when the river played a huge part in building the civilization of Davao.
It was the center of trade and commerce of both the locals and foreigners.
It was the main source of life and livelihood of the city's first settlers.
Davao Dragonboat Association and Davao Jetski Association will also grace the ceremony, showcasing their skills in the surface.
The event will be assisted by the 911, Task force Davao, Philippine maritime, abd Philippine navy to secure the safety of the participants.
After the fluvial parade will be the convergence of all the tribes.
There will be a wonderful presentation of their dances and rituals.
Arts, artifacts, and products of the tribes will also be featured on the course of the event.
During lunch time, there will be an ambahan of foods.
The tribesmen will bring their special delicacy and share it with one another.
Contingents will proceed to the Lumadnong Bantawan which is a musical contest for local artists, then the Hiyas ng Davao will follow.

Nailandia expands presence in Davao, Nailandia expands presence in DavaoTHE newly-opened Manila-based premier spa business in Davao City will open another franchise branch in the city to further strengthen its presence as more customers want to avail of its exquisite services.
Dabawenyos warmly embraced the Nailandia-Davao's first branch situated at SM Lanang Premier, prompting the management to open another branch at SM City Ecoland, which is targeted next year.
Alluring interior designs, ambience of whimsical artistry, relaxing scents, high-quality products and well-offered services, these are just some of the reasons why Nailandia is said to be the next posh body spa and nail studio destination in the city.
"We are overwhelmed by the acceptance and warm embrace the Davao market made us feel.
From the soft launch to the grand until the normal day operations, customers of mix brackets keep on coming back and I2019d like to believe that this is a manifestation of our dedicated pursuit of giving our customers the pampering they well-deserve, more than what they pay for," Ma.
Antoinette Arquiza, franchise owner shared expressing her gratitude to the public response to Nailandia.
Nailandia, a posh body spa and nail studio, is now serving Davaoenos of all ages, with a new concept of total relaxation in nails and body care.
It vows to extend quality services to every age, even as young as three years old.
201cWe take pride in pioneering the first "piggy paint" in Davao, this is a special nail polish we import from US, so rest assured that we will be using safe nail polishes for the kids,201d she said adding that relaxation should know no age requirement.
The nail studio and body spa offers beyond quality services of nail care, body spa, hand and foot spa, nail enhancements, waxing and threading, eyelash enhancement, spa party packages and fairy2019s fantastic treat, a pampering service customized for kids and teens.

Davao's very own fruits and flowers, Davao's very own fruits and flowersDURIAN, mangosteen, rambutan, marang and waling-waling -- where do these fruits and flowers come from? The answer is Davao City.
Its abundance, in fact, has made Davao as the fruit basket and the promising garden in the country.
Davao is known for its flowers and fruits which can only be found and grown in the city.
Let's take for instance the two famous fruit and flower which are distinctively Davao, durian as the "King of all fruits" and waling-waling as the "second national flower."
This 30th Kadayawan sa Dabaw Fstival, fruits and flower will take center stage again as major and minor events during the celebration will highlight the diverse and bountiful natural resources of the city.
Pamulak sa Kadalanan, Durian Festival, Farm and Agro Trade Fair are just some of the events which will highlight Davao's fresh fruits and blooming exotic flowers.
Fruits of Kadayawan
This year2019s Durian festival which is spearheaded by the Durian Industry Council of Davao City  will feature the nine agricultural districts in the city to showcase its native and hybrid durians at the SM Lanang Premiere from August 14 to September 20, 2015.
201cWhen we say Durian, nothing comes in mind but Davao alone.
Durian can be enjoyed by so many ways, from fresh whole Durian fruit to processed fruit products, fruit-based products and food and beverage services,201d Larry Miculob, president of DICDC said.
Also one of the leading homegrown durian products makers, Apo ni Lola, has expanded its product lines from only durian candies to various delicacies like yema, jam, sandwich spread, pie , among others.
201cThere so much to do in Durian, that is something we can be proud of, in fact we will be launching our new 201cdurian coffee201d this year, it is a coffee with a real processed durian meat in it,201d Imee Anabesa, operations supervisor shared adding that the 201cDurian candy food poisoning issue did not affect their business since their brand is already trusted by the buying public and the issue is just an isolated case.
Other fruits such as mangosteen, rambutan, marang are among the most-wanted fruits during the festival.
Flowers of Kadayawan
Pamulak sa Kadalanan, the Kadayawan2019s way of showcasing the various beautiful plants and flowers in the city, but the one that would stand out if we talk about Davao2019s flowers is the famous Waling-waling.
Victoria Jimenez of the Mindanao Floriculture and Ecological Development  said that as a player in the floriculture industry, she advocates to promote the Davao2019s very own flower, the Waling-waling.
201cActually one of my advocacies is to promote our Waling-waling, It would be ideal if all of the household here in Davao would plant and grow his/her own Waling-waling, through this we take part in promoting our very own flower,201d she expressed.
Also this year2019s Farm and Garden Agro Trade Fair offers and highlights a wide array of plants and flowers varieties.
The around 150 exhibitors features flowers and plants like orchids, cacti, bonsai, herbs, succulents, hanging plants, among others.
For this year, in its 20th anniversary, the Sun.Star Davao geared up to participate this year2019s  Kadayawan Pamulak sa Kadalanan.
Fruits and flowers, these are just some of the things Davao can take pride and glory.
Experience Davao like no other and visit Durian festival, Farm and Garden Agro Trade Fair and witness the annual Pamulak sa Kadalanan.
 
Plants and furnitures also take center stage, Plants and furnitures also take center stageAce June Rell S.
Perez, THE plants.
The dish gardens.
The furniture.
The fruits and everything that make Kadayawan's Farm and Agro Trade Fair attractive and inviting.
Throughout the years, since it was first staged in late 1980s, the city's Farm and Agro Trade Fair has turned a lot of buyers into exhibitors.
"The fair had already turned the life paths of most of its customers.
The buyers-before were encouraged and converted to be the exhibitors-of-now," Vicky Jimenez, chair of the Floriculture exhibit shared.
This year, around 150 exhibitors participated in the fair which opened last August 1 and runs until the 31st at SM City Grounds to showcase agricultural products not just entirely of the city but including the whole of the Mindanao.
Almost half of the exhibitors this year are said to be the "new and converted" ones by the event.
"I was once just a buyer, I love to collect flowers, ornamentals, succulents and everything in gardening.
But I did not settle for that, I make a business out of my hobby, and the agro trade helped me a lot on that," Jimenez narrated her own story of conversion from a mere buyer and hobbyist to a full-blown player in floriculture industry.
The fair which is spearheaded by Mindanao Floriculture and Ecological Development Inc.
 and Floriculture Industry of Davao Inc.
 in partnership with the city government of Davao showcases Davao's agri products such as plants, fruits, flowers, furniture, animals, pots, machineries, among others.
But the fair is not just limited to the city but also for the whole Mindanao.
Ilora L.
Chua , Lorymar Garden owner and member of the Minfed shared her own story as she journey with Agro Trade Fair from the very beginning.
"I walk and journey with the fair, I've been here from the very beginning and from what I have observed so far, I saw so much improvement and development.
Every year may improvement talaga, from the area, number of exhibitors, list of activities, varieties of products showcased and most especially the sales," she said.
Chua also shared that on her part, "from soft opening palang, I already generated more than our target.
We generate an average sales of P3,000 daily."
She shared that this can be attributed to the increasing number of tourists and buyers that would visit the fair.

"Our buyers and visitors are not just solely from Davao, we have a lot of visitors who came here regularly from across the country, and they ordered bulk of plants, flowers and other agri products.
There is really a very good market in the fair," Chua said.
Some of the regular customers in the fair aside from Davaoe\xf1os are people from Bacolod, Bohol, Manila, Cebu, among others.
The most commonly bought products in the fair are the unique flowers only from Davao, the Waling-waling.
Orchids also do good in sales according to the exhibitors.
Other favorites of the visitors are the affordable and delicious fruits from Davao, the Durian, Marang, Mangosteen, among others.
The fair will also take centerstage a number of side activities such as the Plants and Floriculture Exhibit competition, the 5th Davao Bonsai Shohin competition, dish gardening competition, lecture series on good agricultural practices, among others.
201cKadayawan is a celebration and thanksgiving of our bountiful harvest and blessings, through the fair we will be able to showcase how diverse and rich we are in fruits, flowers, plants, and the artworks of our fellow Davaoe\xf1os,201d Jimenez expressed.
For this 30th Kadayawan festival explore the Davao2019s distinct way of celebrating the bountiful natural and man-made resources.
Visit the month-long Kadayawan2019s Farm and Garden Agro Trade Fair and see the the beauty and unique life in Davao.
Masbad: WordPress living, Masbad: WordPress livingOPEN source.
Easy to learn.
Un-intimidating.
Easy to setup.
Several ways of how I can describe Wordpress as a content management system .
I see it as a platform as well.
And I see it as something that you can build on when you have your own website.
It used to be that Wordpress was mainly used for blog sites back in the day but, fortunately, thing evolved.
Currently, Wordpress is being used as the backbone of an entire website.
It2019s being used as the platform itself to build the website.
I attribute that to it2019s easy-to-maintain, easy-to-upgrade-and-update ability.

WordPress has grown in popularity in leaps and bounds over the last decade.
Check out that trend chart below from Google Trends.


Given that kind of popularity, it2019s no surprise really that a lot of people are into WordPress development, deployment, maintenance and other involvements.
But the bottomline here is that there2019s money to be earned from WordPress.
It2019s either you write codes to develop themes for WordPress or you become a website developer using WordPress as your system or platform.

Still not convinced how prevalent WordPress is? Check out this website and see how it fares to other CMS.
So2026 how, then, can you make a living out of WordPress?
Click through with this link and find out.
Masbad: NASA on Tumblr or is it Tumblr on NASA?, Masbad: NASA on Tumblr or is it Tumblr on NASA?Roark L.
Masbad, Wacky Tech, http://nasa.tumblr.com/post/126109420794/welcome-to-the-new-official-nasa-tumblr-were

Whatever it is, this has got to be the best mix of news coming from two big things that I have daily dealings with - technology and social media.
Sadly though, I2019m not on Tumblr.
Facebook, Twitter and Instagram are too much already for my brain cells.
But who knows, I might get into it especially since I2019m mulling over reigniting my love for photography.

I am digressing here.

NASA.
Tumblr.

This, to me, is an awesome example of marrying an organization2019s thrusts and reaching out to more people through social media.
In today2019s ever growing influence of the Internet on our lives, it only makes sense that an organization as big as NASA to get on board.

http://nasa.tumblr.com/post/126116972564/curiositymarsrover-rolling-rolling-rolling

Space is such a vast unknown.
NASA2019s efforts in leveraging social media platforms to connect with more people is laudable.
I remember those days when the best sources I had for images from space were the encyclopedia books we had at home.
It2019s a stark contrast to today.
One quick search from Google and you get millions of images to browse through.
I don2019t think you2019d even finish it all in a day.

Going back.
NASA has been on Facebook and Instagram already.
They2019ve been regularly posting images on those two platforms.
Their arrival on Tumblr extends that reach to a whole lot more netizens.
And given that the majority of users of these platforms are millenials, I think it2019s a good thing that they2019ll be able to reach them.

Check them on Instagram and Facebook as well if you haven2019t yet.
Better still: 1.) make sure you get notifications on Facebook whenever they post something; and 2.) follow them on Instagram.





 Streaming Push and Pull: Elongated streams of plasma zipped back and forth along magnetic field lines above several active regions on the sun on July 26-27, 2015.
This kind of activity is rather common, but interesting to watch up close as the streams of particles twist and turn and zip back and forth.
The images were taken of ionized Helium heated to 60,000 degrees C.
in 304 wavelength of extreme ultraviolet light.
Credit: NASA/Solar Dynamics Observatory/Steele Hill.
#nasa #sdo #sun #space #nasabeyond #science
A photo posted by NASA  on Aug 3, 2015 at 5:37pm PDT


Personality Profile: The frontliner, Personality Profile: The frontlinerRhona Goc-ong-Villariasa, MEETING visitors and introducing them to the beauty of Davao makes Abegail Bangoy Dionela ecstatic about her job as front liner of Bisita Dabaw.
Bisita Dabaw is a committee of the Davao City Tourism Office tasked to entertain guests coming in the city.
Skye as she is called by her friends is always in high spirit every time she is out to welcome visitors.
201cI love it.
It's great to be working for the City Tourism,201d Skye shared in an interview.
Born on August 23, 1979, Skye graduated with a degree in Hotel and Restaurant Management in 2010 at the Philippine Women2019s College.
To further enhance her skills, the daughter of Letty Bangoy and Rafael Dionela took a culinary course at Most Institute after graduation.

As a tourism personnel, Skye admits of having difficulties especially in dealing with the different personalities.
201cMeeting people from all walks of life have a lot of challenges.
These people come from different family backgrounds or cultural heritage, and as a result, people have different ways of thinking/doing which might not be shared by all.
But I strive to accommodate everyone trying to be diplomatic in my dealings with them,201d she said.
She admits to having to sacrifice some family time because of the demands of her job, but she does not regret anything.

201cI feel privileged to be in my job right now, to speak in behalf of Davao, to talk about our beloved Mayor Rody Duterte and to promote our city.
I am learning a lot and it's a remarkable experience,201d she said.
Before Skye started her tourism duties, she2019s one of the pioneer models here.
201cI've been modeling since the age of 16.
I started as a ramp model, and then moved on to print.
But nowadays, I do more TV commercials, brand endorsement, as well as being an on-call talent for ABS-CBN Davao,201d she said.
Being a model, Skye were given a chance to travel and explore different places that gave her memorable memories to ponder.
Her trip to Manado Indonesia was one of her cherished experiences.
That time, Skye was one of the models selected to feature the works of the renowned couturier Mr.
Boy Guinoo.

201cThe show was a great success, thanks to the artistic direction of Mr.
Gary Sicam.
That was my first time to travel abroad so I was pretty excited,201d she said.
Despite her towering height and mesmerizing beauty, it didn2019t cross to Skye2019s mind to join a beauty pageant.
201cI've always been a laid back kind of girl.
It is my humble opinion that beauty queens are expected to act in a certain way and I don't know if I can adhere to that.
 I do not want to be restricted in movement and speech.
But I have nothing against women who try out for beauty queens and win the title.
Kudos to them!201d she said.
Even if she shunned 201cbeauty queenhood201d, she2019s a super woman on her own.
Being busy on her tourism duties, some endorsements and other gigs, she is also a hand-on mother to eight siblings.
Skye is always by James Infiesto, the National Chess Federation of the Philippines  11 regional director here, her partner for 14 years.

James has kids from his previous partner that Skye considers as her own.
201cIt is challenging to manage a household of eight.
But being in a relationship means being in a team so basically it requires teamwork.
If one or both partners don't have each other's back, the relationship is doomed to fail,201d she shares.
Being the NCFP 11 regional director, there are instances that James can be invited to international tournaments to help in administering the game.
Skye, an ever supportive partner is always willing to help out on the technicalities during the competition.
On their recent trip to Suwon Korea for 2015 Asian Youth Chess Championships, Skye was the assistant arbiter during the competition, and works as second mom to the young participants from the city joining the event.
Skye and James also own the Bonjee Entertainment Services, wherein the couple is also working hand-in-hand during presentations and magic shows.
201cPapi  and I have always been supportive of each other.
I am glad and proud that I got one of the good men and I could never be prouder of him and his accomplishments,201d she said.
Despite of her hectic schedule, Skye makes sure that family always comes first.
201cIt's always been my motto to put my family first so I would not call it "adjusting".
 I'd like to call it more as I'm wearing many hats.
It means I have different roles or tasks to perform, like being a mom, supermodel, government employee, wife, daughter, sister, friend, etc,201d a giggling Skye shared.
This 36-year-old superwoman, who is also a member of JCI Davao chapter, believes that of all the things she2019s doing, what matter most is she2019s enjoying what she2019s doing and she never forget to be humble.
201cIn everything that you do just put your heart and mind to make it successful and pray for God's wisdom and blessing.
Be kind to one another.
The world needs that,201d Skye ended.
Tagoloan cop: 2018Value work the most2019, Tagoloan cop: 2018Value work the most2019Pamela Jay F.
Orias, 201cI TREAT my job as an essential part of my life.
Gi-kinabuhi na nako akong trabaho,201d said Police Inspector Maricris Mulat, chief of Tagoloan police, who has recently been chosen as one of the awardees of the 2015 Search for the Country2019s Outstanding Police Officers in Service .
A working student, it never crossed Mulat2019s mind to be a police.
201cDili man nako plano na mag-pulis gyud ko, ang ako lang basta makahuman lang ug skwela, tungod gyud sa kapobrehon.201d Mulat said.
Mulat2019s mother works as an agent in an appliance company while her father was a security guard.
After her parents decided to part ways, her mother raised the five Mulat siblings alone.
201cGi-paningkamutan gyud ni mama na makahuman ko ug skwela aron himuon lugar ko niya na partner sa pagpanginabuhi, pagpa-eskwela sa akong mga manghod ,201d she said.
Mulat was able to graduate with an Education degree at Lourdes College pursuing her mother2019s dream to be a teacher.
However, Mulat did not enter the world of teaching; instead, she used her Education degree to take up Criminology at Cagayan de Oro College .
201cPursigido gyud ko na maghuman ug skwela ug mag-police kay sigurado ko na ug musulod ko sa government, sure ang future sa akong mga igsoon na nag-eskwela pa before, ug sa akong pamilya na karon I was so determined to finish my studies and pursue to become a police so I can enter the government work to ensure the future of my siblings who were still studying before and for my family now),201d she said.
She also said there was never a time when she doubted her capacity to reach what she wanted.
201cKaya man sa uban, nganu dili man nako makaya?201d Mulat added.
Already in her sixteen years in service, Mulat said she takes the problems as 2018challenges2019, adding that it gets 2018exciting2019 and 2018fulfilling2019 everyday as long as 2018your heart is in it.2019
Mulat furthers that 2018domestic violence2019 and operations against illegal drugs are on the top of her priority list.
201cMy mother was a victim in domestic violence, so gihatagan sab gyud ni nako na area ug priority.
So, we conduct information drive or mga seminars against domestic violence in my area of responsibility,201d she said.
Mulat added that the Tagoloan police is also intensifying its campaign against illegal drugs, 201cNagtuo gyud ko na kining illegal drugs maoy root cause sa mga kawat, tulis, rape, kay kung ang tao dili mag-indulge sa crime, dili man gyud siguro ingana ka daotan.201d
She said she won2019t let a month pass by without arresting someone dealing with illegal drugs, 201cAlso to let people know that we are serious, we take this job seriously.201d
Mulat has now two kids, a boy and a girl, both in their adolescence, and a supportive husband.
201cAkong pamilya dili gyud babag sa akong pagpanerbisyo, they have always been so supportive.
Akong mga bata, ang ilang namathan gyud, akong trabaho na pagka-police,201d Mulat said.
As a public servant, Mulat sees 2018dedication2019 and 2018passion2019 as keys to get the job done.
201cKinahanglan dedicated ta sa atong gipanumpaan,201d she added.
Reclaiming identity, Reclaiming identityChristine Joice C.
Cudis, THERE is almost no trace of the indigenous peoples in our lives.
Among themselves, their heritage, their practices, and their garments are slowly fading to modernity.

Is this because of the progressive lifestyle? Is the advancement of the world really the one that is killing them?
On a trip to South Cotabato, you can meet the exceptional tribe of the Blaans, the first settlers of Koronadal's lower valley.
It is ironic to see them struggling to exist in a community they used to own and suffering discrimination from people who do not understand the roots of their culture.
Educator Senyorita Monday Tony shares her sentiments as a young Blaan student being discriminated.
"Kapag may pangit na bata, kahit hindi namin siya ka-tribo, sinasabihan ng ibang tao na 'hoy para kang Blaan.' Kapag maingay, 'hoy para kayong mga Blaan!'" she says.
She admits that circumstances like this result in lower self-esteem and thus, lower productivity of the Blaan people.
Some of the people around them insult and look down on them for the way they dress and talk.
In fact, the new generation of Blaans sees acculturation as a way to escape this kind of treatment.
"Yung ilang kabataan sa amin, iniisip nila na mabuti pa mag Bisaya na lang para walang diskriminsayon, para hindi laitin," Tony says.
But being the thinking people that they are, they resist abuse and embrace possibilities of better living.
They demand education for their children.

"Yung dati sa Department of Education na books, we cannot find the story about our tribe, we should have our own story published there.
This way the children will never forget who we are," she says.
They have the Department Order 62, series of 2011 from DepEd that mandates a culture responsive education for the indigenous people.
Windy Rose Bansil, 13 years old, 7th grader, says she takes pride in her tribe.

Although young, she has the spirit of maturity with regards her siblings and her people.
She treks nine kilometers everyday just to reach school.
When asked about what kind of profession she wants to be in, "Teacher.
Para marami ang trabaho sa mga bata sa sunod.
."
The local government arranges activities that help promote preservation of their culture.

Three days a week, they celebrate Indigenous People's Day.
During Mondays and Wednesdays, the little kids and the adults traditional wear their traditional Blaan attire.
And on Fridays, they conduct activities such as dancing and singing.
Maybe, if we stop putting our indigenous brothers and sisters down for practicing such traits from their culture, they will not be ashamed.
They will no longer squeeze into the outer borders of their comfort zones.
And maybe by this time, you already know that modernity is not the one to blame for the slowly diminishing culture of our natives.
Civic activities make Super B no.
1, Civic activities make Super B no.
1Alger Dura, IN 16 years of serving the reading public in Davao Region, Sun.Star Davao SuperBalita, sister publication of Sun.Star Davao, has played key role in the growth of Sun.Star Publishing, Inc.
that has been in the newspaper business for 20 years now, covering the southern part of the country.
The most significant contribution of SuperBalita is the latest survey released by Ateneo de Davao University  that showed Cebuano tabloid is now number one among local broadsheets and tabloids in Davao City.
The survey shows SuperBalita is preferred by 26.20 percent of those surveyed, beating all leading local community papers, including Cebuano tabloids circulating in the metropolis and neighboring areas in Mindanao.
In district cross tabulation in the survey, SuperBalita got 18 percent in District 1, 33.50  percent in District 2, and 26.40 percent in District 3 with a total tabulation of 26.20 percent.

The sex cross tabulation also showed that SuperBalita is widely read by both male and female respondents who answered the survey questionnaire.
SuperBalita got 26.60 percent from male and 25.70 percent from female respondents with a total score of 26.20 percent.
For class of dwelling cross tabulation, the Cebuano tabloid is also read by classes A, B, C, D, and E.
The survey showed that SuperBalita got 23.50 percent from classes AB, 23.40 percent from class B, 23.70 percent from class D, and 31.70 percent from class E with a total tabulation of 26.20 percent.
It was also revealed that readers would love to read shocking headlines followed by top stories, sports, entertainment, etc.
The survey result shows the management's hard work headed by Sun.Star president Gina G.
Atienza, general manager Tessie Alcoriza Pa\xf1a, editor-in-chief Stella A.
Estremera with the help of all employees.

Before Super B attained this success, SuperBalita faced a lot of challenges in serving its clientele as the management commits to continuously introduce innovations to make its presence more felt in the communities.

To fulfill what has been promised, every year the paper introduced innovations in its content, and different services have been lined up for all Dabawenyos who are target beneficiaries of medical clinics, free haircut, job fair, tree planting activities, etc.
Those activities were part of Sun.Star Publishing's corporate social responsibility  projects.
Also, we organized different competitions such as billiard, Super Suki Raffle Promos, jingle and dance competitions.
The company has given away many items, one of them was a tricycle used for livelihood.
The latest competition was the recently concluded Bangga sa Sayaw Metro Davao Edition last August 21, 2015 at the NCCC Mall Davao.
It was designed to give opportunity to all dance enthusiasts in Davao City to become champions here or abroad.
As to content, SuperBalita has maintained its commitment to educate, entertain and engage the readers.
Thus, we continuously write stories that educate the readers about health, business, relationships, and even religious articles.

To entertain the readers, the paper chooses headlines that are intriguing and attention-grabbing that not only shocked and grabbed the attention of the readers, but actually made them buy the paper.

SuperBalita's shocking headlines truly get the reader's attention, aroused their curiosity, and made their day more interesting than usual.

To make readers part of our paper, SuperBalita has also engaged them in addressing their complaints, publish their opinion on certain issues, and publish their success stories.

These strategies really made SuperBalita truly number one in the hearts of our readers.
Dedicated to serving the community, Dedicated to serving the communityRuji Peter S.
Abat, FOR two decades, Sun.Star Davao has established itself as the forerunner among the community newspapers in Davao Region hence, there's no way but up as what the 20th anniversary celebration slogan "Up!" would say.
Sun.Star Davao is not new to upping the ante and pulling ahead of its competitors.
Even during the time of Ang Peryodiko Dabaw and before the paper was acquired by Sun.Star's family of community newspapers in 1995, it went ahead of its local competitors as it was the first to utilize desktop publishing back when all of its competitors were using typesetting machines.
Fast forward to 2015, Sun.Star Davao has recently acquired the global web machine, a cutting-edge printing machine that promises a more refined quality for the daily copies.
Through the years, Sun.Star Davao has also carved a niche in journalistic excellence as it has established itself as the winningest community paper in the region having reaped around 70 awards.
The most recent of which was the award won by Sun.Star Davao editor-in-chief Stella Estremera in the European Union  Peace Journalism Awards for her story "Rituals for Peace." She also won the Best News Story in the 1st Sarihay Media Awards for her story "Davao Gulf: Rich Spawning Ground." 
Sun.Star Davao also showed that it has guided the community particularly the business sector in making sound decisions after winning the Best in Business and Economic Reporting Award given by the Philippine Press Institute .
Sun.Star Davao has earned citations from various government agencies as well which includes the Social Security System having been cited as one of the most compliant SSS contributors in the region; the Department of Social Welfare and Development  for its support in the different projects that the agency implements; the Davao City Police Office for its strong stance in promoting peace and order in the city and from the So Kim Cheng Foundation and Davao City Sports Council for its undying support for sports development.
While the digital age is already taking its toll on the print media industry, Sun.Star Davao refused to falter to the changing times as it started adapting to the digital platform through the Sun.Star website which saw the first few online publications in 2010.

Bolstering its bid as one of the most versatile media platforms in the region, Sun.Star Davao has also launched its Sun.Star Davao E-Paper which is now available at the Google and Apple apps stores.
This shows the commitment of Sun.Star Davao to serve the community with its daily news whether it is on the newsstands in the streets or establishments or in the comfort of their mobile phones, computers and other digital platforms.
Sun.Star Davao came close to the hearts of Dabawenyos when it chronicled the different cultures, personalities, economy and landscape through the re-launch of the Sun.Star Davao Yearbook in 2013.
But Sun.Star Davao's dedication to serving the community has gone beyond the bounds of delivering daily news.
Sun.Star Davao has been steadfast in its drive to serve the community by conducting outreach programs in different parts of the region.
Just recently, Sun.Star Davao led by its general manager Tessie Alcoriza conducted a series of outreach programs in different schools in the region where Sun.Star Davao employees handed out school supplies and assisted in the rehabilitation of school facilities.
True to its slogan, Sun.Star Davao remains and will remain above its competition as it is bent on leveling up its standards and service to appease the ever-growing demands of the community.
The service awardees, The service awardeesKarlo Paolo R.
Pates, FOR its 20th Founding Anniversary, Sun.Star Publishing, Inc.
once again provides fitting recognition to six of its employees for their contribution in the growing success of the company.

These employees dedicated their precious time and service in various departments that contributed to the success that Sun.Star Davao currently enjoys.
They have remained loyal to the company for years.
Behind every successful story, there are people who made it possible.
Employees receiving the longtime service awards this year are Sun.Star Davao's editor-in-chief Stella A.
Estremera, layout artist Maria Merlita Quimpang, copy readers Jose Mari Encila and Cristina E.
Alivio, Accounting department supervisor Lovella C.
Panio, and advertising consultant Osha Marie Paglinawan.
Estremera has been with of the organization ever since Sun.Star acquired ownership of Ang Peryodiko where she worked as an editor.
She established first herself as a features and layout editor before she was promoted as the editor-in-chief in 2003.
  
"I like the job.
It allowed me to explore as well as touch people's lives.
I like community journalism because it brings you closer to people," she said when asked to express the fulfillment of his work as a journalist.
She also said credibility of a journalist is vital in sustaining one's career.
"It is your best protection.
It also earns you the respect that opens more doors to more stories and opportunities," she said, adding that what distinguishes a journalist's work from other story-tellers is that the story are non-fiction -- they're factual and current.
All these years, Estremera already received countless of distinctions and awards from different award giving bodies that includes; the only five-time individual awardee of the Unicef-Philippines Press Institute Awards for Child Friendly Journalists and Newspapers, 23 awards for column writing, news writing, science and technology, environment, peace, family and child rights, and investigative reporting, Grand Finalist for Print Media in EU Peace Journalism Awards, and among others.

For Quimpang, she said she did not know the reasons why she's still working with Sun.Star.
 
She has been the paper's lay-out formatter since January 1, 1995.
She said working in this company made her experienced the best and the worst.
"Siguro komportable nako diri, murag pamilya na akong trato dira mao wala na pud ko nagaisip mubalhin pud ug lain company ," she said.
Encila, meanwhile, started to work as a proofreader way back in February 14, 2000.
Even he himself is also shocked that he managed to stay in a company for more than 15 years.
He even joked that Sun.Star is so clingy for letting him stick this long.

"I'm one of the gatekeepers, so I make sure I get things right or else I get reprimanded," he said when asked to describe his role in the company.
Alivio is one of the hardworking people in the company.
She may have worked as a proofreader since September 1, 2000, but she also does additional errands asked by her supervisors.
"I really don't know.
I'm still searching for the answer why God has placed me here at Sun.Star Davao and for letting me stay here longer than I, myself, expected," she said, but was quick to add that God may still have plans for her and that's why she has remained with the company.
For an advertising consultant like Paglinawan, the job of selling the newspaper to advertisers and clients relies solely on her shoulders, but she considers it as more like of a hobby than a work.
Paglinawan, who joined the company on Aug.
16, 2005 as an advertising consultant, said that the company has given her growth as a person financially and emotionally.
"It boosts my confidence as a person in terms of dealing with advertisers and clients.
I love to sell our newspaper," she said.

Panio, who's presently the accounting supervisor of Sun.Star Davao, also shared that having the freedom and flexibility on her work gives her a sense of happiness and fulfillment.
Despite obtaining at least 10 years of working experience in this company, she assured that she's still learning the ropes of making their department2019s work easier and better.
"I just love my job.
I love the people I work with," she said.
Panio, who was hired by the company on September 21, 2005, said that the over-all feeling of belongingness and familiarity in the company inspired her to stick this long.
The Davao Yearbook: Chronicler of Davao history, The Davao Yearbook: Chronicler of Davao historyKriztja Marae G.
Labrador, CREATED to preserve the history and rich culture of Davao City, Sun.Star Davao's annual coffee table book has continued to showcase and highlight almost all of the "nitty-gritty" of Davao that Dabawenyos ought to know.
Sun.Star Management president Gina Garcia-Atienza, in a recent interview, said that with Sun.Star Davao being a community-based publication, the yearbook serves as a contribution "to chronicling the history of the Davao community."
"A yearbook is crucial because of its historicity.
While a news item may be forgotten in 100 years' time, events chronicled in a yearbook will always be there," she said.
The re-launched yearbook started its release in 2013, wherein it highlighted the history of Davao and how it became the Davao that we know now, the yearbook since then has been continuing to serve its purpose.
Atienza said that in creating the yearbook, they are looking at the important events that took place for that certain year and for things that are waiting to be told.

The yearbook also gathers insights both from Dabawenyos and people living outside the city.
"We try to incorporate what is old and what is new into a yearbook, from both a Dabawenyo's and an outsider's point of view
For 2014, Sun.Star Davao's yearbook featured the backbones that have contributed to the region's growth and brought it in motion to becoming as progressive as it continues to be now.
The yearbook featured the "upgraded version" of agriculture in the city by featuring processed goods, the power industry, businesses that started from small beginnings, and government infrastructures.
For 2015, Sun.Star Davao decided to focus on the fertile land of Davao Region.
It featured stories of different personalities, successful companies, and the rich outdoors of the region that has contributed to its development.
When asked about what to look forward for next year's yearbook, Atienza said that with the yearbooks released by the Sun.Star Davao being "mostly inward-looking." 
She said that for 2016, the media group wants "to bring Davao to the world."
Meet Sun.Star's Gawad Dabawenyo awardee, Meet Sun.Star's Gawad Dabawenyo awardeeIvy C.
Tejano, IN CELEBRATION of its 20th year in the newspaper industry in this part of the country, Sun.Star Davao bestows the prestigious Gawad Dabawenyo Award to a church worker and a respected anthropologist, artist and peace advocate based in Mindanao.
Bro.
Carlito M.
Gaspar, Ph.D CSsR, simply Bro.
Karl to his colleagues and friends, has been cited for being "a true authority on life's purpose and spirituality."
Bro.
Karl joins past awardees, namely: Perfecto Yasay, former Security and Exchange Commission chair; Davao-born songwriter/singer Joey Ayala; civic leader Irene Santiago; the late staunch advocate of peace and federalism Rey Magno Teves; Mother Ma.
Assumpta M.
David RVM, and former Philippine Women's College of Davao president lawyer Rosa Santos Munda.
A Redemptorist brother, Bro.
Karl is also a poet-songwriter, a professor, a prolific book writer especially about the indigenous peoples and a political detainee at the height of the Marcos dictatorship and still standing up for peace decades hence.
He is described most by his colleagues as a man with spirituality that embraces the poor and the oppressed.
Born on June 8, 1947 in Davao City, Bro, Karl completed his doctoral degree in Philippine Studies from the University of the Philippines  in Quezon City in 2001.
He is a post graduate of Master of Science in Economics from Asian Social Institute in Manila in 1971, and a graduate of Bachelor of Arts in Sociology from Ateneo de Davao University in 1967.
Bro.
Karl grew up in the cities of Davao and Digos.
His parents Salvador and Josefina Gaspar, who originated from Capiz and Pangasinan, respectively, decided to transfer to Davao City just before the outbreak of the World War II.
"Being a brother has always been my first choice when I thought of my religious vocation.
I did not want to become a priest.
Why a brother? Mainly because the choices of a brother are much better and wider than becoming a priest," Gaspar, in an e-mail, said.
As a writer, Karl has authored several books, including novels, and contributed a number of articles and essays to various publications in the Philippines and abroad.
"I also wanted a greater sense of freedom and not be ne confined to doing parish work or maintaining sacramental duties.
 As brother, my choice of ministry is also much wider.
Thus I could be a professor, a non-government organization  worker, do grassroots work among the poor, and be a journalist, among the others," he added.
Bro.
Karl was a victim of Marcos Dictatorship.
He was arrested on September 23, 1972 and placed under house arrest for three months.
Then, he was arrested and imprisoned overnight in Lake Sebu in South Cotabato in 1974, detained for 22 months at Davao Metrodiscom stockade, acquitted by Regional Trial Court  and released in February 1985.
It was in 1985 when Karl joined the Congregation of the Most Holy Redeemer  as a Religious Brother.

At present, Bro.
Karl is also a lecturer, resource person, evaluator and consultant of various educational institutions, church and non-governmental organizations with several awards and citations.
He considers travelling different parts of the world as his greatest achievement, saying he had visited places which he only dreamed of when he was a young boy.

But at the same time, he said: "I have also reached practically all corners of the Philippines and Mindanao, thus I could claim to have been able to be familiarize with what is Filipino, what is Mindanawon.
To have been able to actually live among Muslim and Lumad communities, know their culture, be in touch with my roots and yet remain a strong advocate for their rights to their land and their struggle for self-determination."
Bro.
Karl also said that he is extra proud of the fact that he has hundreds of close friends representing various cultures, faith traditions, genders, races, ages, classes and able to appreciate the richness of Mindanawon cultures, adding that in his advanced years, he was able to mentor young people so that they too are inspired to continue the struggles for justice, peace and integrity of creation.
When asked if he is already happy and contented with his life, Bro.
Karl said: "By and large, I am most happy with my life right now as I am still able to do things I love to do including to travel, strengthen my family ties and my vocation as a redemptorist brother, meet new friends, write books, do art work, nurture a garden work, nurture a garden of flowers and herbs, deepen my spirituality and find time to have fun and enjoy the blessings of life." 
Loyalty throughout the years, Loyalty throughout the yearsChristine Joice C.
Cudis, SUN.STAR DAVAO has championed the challenge of modernity as it remains seated to its throne being the most-awarded newspaper in Mindanao.
In its 20 years in the newspaper industry, it has withstand every crisis which the country encountered for the past years.
Since the year 2000, the paper has been a regular reaper of Best Edited, Best in Environment and Science Reporting, Best in Business and Economic Reporting, Best Editorial Page, and Best in Photojournalism Awards in the annual Philippine Press Institute's Community Press Awards.
Just this year, Sun.Star received the 2015 EU Peace Journalism Awards as the Grand Finalist for Print Media and 2015 1st Sarihay Media Awards, Foundation for the Philippine Environment as Best in Regional Reporting and Best in Business and Economic Reporting in the PPI awards.
Sun.Star also has a wide range of readership since it is the first newspaper in Mindanao to launch a website for the public which is accessible at sunstar.com/davao.
These achievements paved way for more readers, making it an effective medium to promote products and services, attracting the country's top corporations and local businesses in the region.
As it celebrates its 20th year in the business, it is only fitting for Sun.Star Davao, the leading community newspaper and the most awarded in this part of the country, to honor its loyal business partners.
Here are the paper's top advertisers throughout the years:
Touch DDB Group Philippines
This company is a full service communications group composed of award-winning advertising, digital, media, activations, and PR agencies.
Over the years, the group has made a mark in local and international markets by creating cutting-edge solutions for a diverse portfolio of local and multi-national clients.
Starcom Philippines
Starcom has crafted the most inventive, effective, inspiring human experiences for some of the globe's biggest marketers empowered by a unique propriety approach to creating the Space for ideas.
To determine and act on the best opportunities, Starcom leverages a refined mixture of art and science to identify and activate the best ideas for brands and their audiences.
Starcom MediaVest Group Philippines
This company is the advertising and marketing communications division of Paris-based advertising conglomerate Publicist.
Media Force 
This advertising agency is one of the two Philippine local media partners of Aegis Group.
It was in January 2005 when this company was created to become the largest Filipino media specialist company.
The only local media agency then that provided entrepreneurial approach to the delivery of superior media services to the market.
M2M Media Philippines
This agency was born from a simple idea and a strong sense of purpose.
Back in 2003, its owners saw the opportunity to provide clients with an alternative to what existed in the marketplace at the time.
 
Top local business partners who have remained loyal to the products and services offered by Sun.Star are the following.
8990 Housing Dev't Corp.
"We're very happy about having relationship with Sun.Star Davao.
In the past until today, they have given us quality in terms of news coverage and the best spread in their pages.
DECA homes and Sun.Star share the same vision, providing always quality and value to consumers.
Happy 2oth Anniversary!" 
-- Deca Homes president and chief executive officer Januario Jesus Atencio, III.
SM Supermarket
"Through the years, we applaud the consistency of Sun.Star's news delivery.
Thank you for giving us what we need." Store Manager of SM Supermarket, Ryan Malaluan.
SM Supermalls
"Sun.Star Davao has always been a partner of SM since we opened our first mall here in the city in 2001.
We continue to trust SunStar with our ads because of its reach and wide readership.
We have also fostered good business relations with them of which we are grateful for." SM Supermalls AVP for Marketing-Mindanao, Russel Alaba.
DMI Medical Supply, Inc.

This homegrown company is widely known for its food supplement, called MX3 which is extracted from a tropical fruit named mangosteen.
The company does not only aim excellence in the industry but it also dedicates itself in playing a significant part to feed and heal the world with Natural products.
Aside from that, it also reaches out to other people by giving back a portion of its gains through charities and grants.
Victoria Plaza Mall
The first mall in Davao City which was established on March 16, 1993 is also a loyal advertiser.
Tech Tips: Stuff you didn't know you could do on Facebook, Tech Tips: Stuff you didn't know you could do on FacebookNEW YORK -- Did you know you can add a pronunciation guide to your name on Facebook? Overlay colorful text on the photos you post? How about mark the end of a relationship without your 500 closest friends getting notified?
Many of these tips and tricks aren't well known, even to veterans of the 1.5 billion-strong people-connector and time-waster.
Facebook is constantly updating its service, adding new features or tweaking old ones.
A lot can slip through the cracks even if you are scrolling through your friends' updates several times a day.
Here are a few ways to enhance your Facebook experience:
HOW DO YOU SAY THAT?
More than 83 percent of Facebook's users are outside of the U.S.
and Canada, and they use over 80 languages to communicate with friends and family.
That's a lot of people, and a lot of different ways to say your name.
To add a pronunciation guide, go to the "about" section of your profile and click on "details about you,"  then "name pronunciation." Here, Facebook will offer suggestions for your first and last name that you can listen to before selecting.
If none work, you can also type in your own phonetic pronouncer.
ONE-TIME PASSWORD
Logging in from a public computer? If you don't feel comfortable typing in your password on a shared machine that might have malicious software.
Facebook lets you request a temporary one by texting "otp" to 3404 for Smart and 2933 for Globe Telecom.
You'll get an eight-character passcode that works for the next 20 minutes and cannot be reused.
UNSUBSCRIBE
Anyone who's commented on a popular Facebook post, or belongs to a particularly chatty group, knows that those notifications telling you that "Jane Doe and 4 others also commented on a post" can get a bit annoying.
You can turn off notifications for individual posts by clicking on the globe icon on the top right corner of your Web browser, then on the "X" next to the individual notification.
You can also change your notification settings here to get fewer or more of them for each group that you belong to.
To do this on mobile, click to view the original post, then click the down arrow in the top right corner of the post.
You'll see an option to "turn off notifications."
KEEP IT ON THE DOWN-LOW
Announcing engagements and marriages on Facebook is fun.
Post and watch the likes and congrats roll in.
Bask in the love and glory.
Fast-forward a few years for some couples, and the glory fades, not to mention the love and marriage.
In this case, you might not want to announce the irreversible breakdown to 450 of your closest friends.
Thankfully, you can still mark the end of a relationship without notifying everyone.
Go to your profile and click on the "about" section, then "family and relationships on the left." Under relationship, you'll see a gray icon that probably says "friends," or maybe "public." Change it to "only me." Then change your relationship status.
After a while, you can change it back if you wish.
Your hundreds of acquaintances will be none the wiser, unless they are stalking your profile to see if you are single.
PICTURE PERFECT
Thanks to a popular but little-known new feature, Facebook lets you spruce up the photos you post by adding text and quirky stickers, such as drawings of scuba gear, sunglasses or a corn dog.
This tool is available on iPhones and is coming soon to Android devices.
To use it, choose a photo to upload and click the magic wand icon.
Here, you'll find text overlay options as well as the same stickers you can use in other parts of Facebook.
SECURITY CHECK
Another recent addition to Facebook's trove of tools is a "security checkup" that guides users through a checklist aimed at making their account more secure.
This includes logging out of Facebook on Web browsers and apps they are not using, and receiving alerts when someone tries to log in to their account from an unfamiliar device or browser.
To use it, go to https://www.facebook.com/help/securitycheckup on your computer 2014 this feature is not yet available on the mobile app.

For the first time, 1 billion people used Facebook in a day, For the first time, 1 billion people used Facebook in a day
In this March 25, 2015 file photo, Mark Zuckerberg talks about the Messenger app during the Facebook F8 Developer Conference in San Francisco.
For the first time, a billion people used Facebook in a single day on Monday, Aug.
24, 2015.
Zuckerberg marked the occasion with a post on his Facebook page, saying that one out of seven people on Earth logged in to the social network to connect with their friends and family.

NEW YORK -- For the first time, a billion people used Facebook in a single day on Monday, August 24.
CEO Mark Zuckerberg marked the occasion with a post on his Facebook page, saying that one out of seven people on Earth logged in to the social network to connect with their friends and family.
The one billion figure is different from the daily user numbers Facebook discloses each quarter when it reports its financial results.
Those are the average number of daily users, counted over a 30-day period.
Facebook had 968 million daily active users in June.
Overall, Facebook has nearly 1.5 billion users who log in at least once a month.
It hit the one billion user milestone in October 2012.
Most people on Facebook live outside the US and Canada.

The write style, The write style
THE ISSA EXPRESS.
Issa Perez blogs about style and fashion, at times throwing into the mix bits about travel, food adventures and random things she and her readers would find interesting.
Deneb R.
Batucan, Blogger, entrepreneur Issa Perez explores life through fashion
, WITH her upbeat demeanor and infectious smile, Issa Perez lights up any room.
Her bright and bubbly personality shines through her small frame and eyes lock on her with every step 2014 she greets everyone and plants a kiss on the cheek.
Issa has a knack of doing things her own way.
Even though she studied nursing because of her parents2019 wishes, her goal has always been into fashion.
201cGrowing up, when people would ask me what I wanted to be, I would always say fashion writer or fashion designer,201d she said.

More about Issa's story in August 23, 2015 issue of Sun.Star Weekend.
Click here to read more.

Empowered, empowering, Empowered, empoweringAce June Rell S.
Perez, IN HER pursuit to prove that "women nowadays are innovators", she emerged as Miss World - Mindanao 2015.
As the island's representative for this year's Miss World, which will be held in Metro Manila in the last quarter of 2015, Sheila Mae A.
Torino, a 20-year-old beauty promised to give her best.
"I've been to so many pageants and most of the times, runner-ups lang ako, worst wala talaga but with those experiences I am more fueled to drive my way to the top," she said adding that failures of today are just delayed success.
She started joining beauty pageants when she was 17.
Winning the crown, for her, is one of her biggest challenges to date.
"Winning the crown is not just about the glitz and the glamour, it's about the advocacy you have and how you will use the title as your part for the society's development, it's more on living your advocacy," she added.
The only daughter of Aileen and Walter, the mass communication graduate and beauty queen shares that her advocacy will be proper information dissemination about women's moral rights.
Women, according to her should not be conformed to the idea of only "man" to run the world.
She narrated that with this generation's trend in technology; it can be a perfect tool for a better and well-informed world.
"The title shall be my guide towards our quest for a wonderful and peace-loving world.
Let us act and feel beautiful, not just with physical likeness but as well as with our internal virtues.
I shall be a model to the young." she said with enthusiasm adding that being a role model to the youth is everyone's responsibility.
The Mindanao2019s representative will be flying to Manila sometime in September to start her training with Aces and Queens Studio in preparation to the big event.
During her stay here in her home city, Sheila will be busy with some charity works with Field of Dreams Children's Charity Foundation, the chosen beneficiary of the Miss World Philippines 2015 - Mindanao Search.
Sheila will be representing the city for the second time in a national competition.
In 2012 she was the representative of the city for Slimmer's World of that year.

Masbad: Double pick, Masbad: Double pickFIRST pick.
Instagram update.

About a few days ago, Instagram released an update that allows everyone to now upload landscape- and portrait-oriented photos without getting cropped into its standard square format.
This is good news to a photographer like me.
I don2019t need any third-party app anymore so I can put in a non-square format photo.
My landscape photos can now be posted as it is and it actually looks great! 
Here2019s a photo I posted.


Second pick.
Someone switched back and forth between the iPhone 6 Plus and the Samsung Galaxy Note 5.

I2019m an Apple fan.
Let2019s get that in there.
The article2019s an interesting quickie comparison between the two phones.

Click over to read the article here.
Bonus pick.
Why did Instagram break free out of the box?
One big reason according to a Petapixel article -- "14 million whitespaces a day." Let me a quote out of an article published in Petapixel:
Numbers speak: 1 in 5 images posted on the photo sharing platform had whitespace around it because the image was captured with another app that didn2019t have these restrictions.
That2019s 14 million whitespaces a day 2014 not a stat Instagram could boast about.
While the company would have probably loved to be the only app people used to shoot and share photos and videos, its own success has triggered such an onslaught of other photo apps that it impossible to lock the market.
Those other apps, currently estimated in the tens of thousands available in the app store, offer the typical horizontal and vertical framing people have been accustomed to from their cameras.
Instagram could have probably continued the way it was if it weren2019t for videos and its competition.
Whatever the real reason be, I still think it2019s a welcome change and things are looking really good since then.
They who bring light, They who bring light
RAFI awardee
Karlo Paolo R.
Pates, CEBU CITY -- Amid our collective wailings against a society that has seemed to have been corrupted to the core, it is heartening to get to know individuals willing to sacrifice and committed in making the lives of others better without getting something in return, not even attention.
Anita 201cNanay Anit201d Castillon, a retired teacher, and Kadtabanga Foundation for Peace and Development Advocates Inc.
 made up of former Moro rebels turned peace advocates, were hailed as the modern-day heroes by the 6th Ramon Aboitiz Foundation Inc.
 Triennial Awards.
Castillon received the Ramon Aboitiz Award for Exemplary Individual while the KFPDAI was declared winner for the Eduardo Aboitiz Award for Outstanding Institution.
The awarding ceremony was held last August 14 at the Grand Cebu Convention Center in Cebu City.

Castillon, principal and founder of the Marmylone Learning Center in Lake Sebu, South Cotabato, dedicated more than 35 years of service for the T'boli tribe by establishing three Indigenous Learning Schools for the T'bolis who did not have access to schools in the mountainuous barangays in Lake Sebu.
At 62 years old, Castillon, who hails from Antique, nurtured the T'boli families as if they were her own siblings and helped their communities in becoming more self-reliant while helping provide access to basic services.
Called as Nanay Anit by most of her acquaintances, she herself experienced early life struggles as she became a widow at 22 and from hence focused on raising her only daughter, who's currently based in US, and pursued a career in teaching.
Dedicating her service to the T'boli tribe since 1979 as part of the Sta.
Cruz Mission, Nanay Anit established three IP schools in Lake Sebu where a child can enroll for a monthly fee of P50.
She also collects P20 per month from each child for the school's feeding program that is complemented by the vegetables from the school garden.
Aside from her duties in the schools, Nanay Anit also works hand in hand with the Municipal Nutrition Office, which helped reduce malnutrition among children.

Castillon at first was regarded as an insurgent by the T'bolis and the military, but she was unfazed and continued her work until she earned the trust of the T'bolis.
Nanay Anit also found ways to preserve the intricate crafts of the tribe.
T'Boli's handcrafts, brass casting, and beadworks are brought to the local tourism office to be sold providing income to the families.
201cMany people have ignored the IPs ,201d Nanay Anit explained, adding that she wants to dedicate the rest of her life with the T'bolis as it makes her heart blossoms with happiness.
"I'm really thankful for this award.
This will mean a lot not just for me but for the T'bolis in Lake Sebu.
Thank you RAFI for this recognition," she said.
When asked about how she will make use of the cash prize that she won, Castillon answered that she plans to construct a water system for three Indigenous Learning Schools she established in Lake Sebu.
She also said that she will allocate some amount to purchase a carabao to help their farming programs for the T'boli.
Meanwhile, Diacolano said that the KFPDAI plans to use the money to fund a microfinancing program for their PDCs.
KFPDAI, a foundation based in Datu Odin Sinsuat in Maguindanao, was established in 2000 by members of the Moro National Liberation Front after the signing of the Final Peace Agreement between the Philippine Government and the MNLF.
Hadja Giobay Diacolano, KFPDAI's executive director, admitted that she was a former MNLF combatant herself but she along with other members decided to lay down their arms and leave the battlefields to transform the war-conflicted areas to a Peace and Development Communities .
Around 50 former members of the MNLF are now serving as staff of the foundation mainly focused in organizing peace building and development oriented activities including emergency assistance and delivery of other basic social services.
Diacolano became emotional during the press conference for the awardees while recounting her past experiences as an MNLF combatant.
She also admitted that after the foundation was established, they had a hard time convincing other communities to be declared as PDCs since taking arms was foremost in the minds of the people.
"We made them realize that we are not their enemy.
We told them that we are working for peace and not for war and through that their allowed us to be more involved in their communities," Diacolano said.
For the last 15 years, the KFPDAI helped 28 municipalities be declared as PDCs in Maguindanao.
During her acceptance speech, Diacolano said that the award is dedicated for all those who struggled to bring peace and development in Mindanao.
Winners received trophies and P484,000 cash prize each.
Other nominees for the individual category are Fr.
Carmelo Diola of the Archdiocese of Cebu and Agusan del Norte, first district Representative Lawrence Lemuel Fortun.
While the finalists for the institutions category are Balay Mindanaw Foundation Inc., Cantaan Centennial Multi-Purpose Cooperative , Sibog Katawhan Alang sa Paglambo, Inc  and Western Samar Development Foundation Inc.
.
All finalists also received P121,000 from RAFI.
Gina Garcia-Atienza, chairman of the 6th Rafi Triennial Awards search committee and also the Sun.Star Media Group's president, said that they had a hard time picking out the finalists and winners from 295 nominations.
201cWhat is common in this year's finalists is that they went out from their comfort zones to help people,201d said Atienza told the media in a press conference held after the awading ceremony.
The RAFI Triennial Awards in the Visayas and Mindanao was launched in 1996 to give recognition to individuals and institutions who committed themselves to building a more humane, equitable, and caring society.
Tech Tips: Windows 10 privacy settings worth checking, Tech Tips: Windows 10 privacy settings worth checking
This screen shot provided by Microsoft shows Cortana, Microsoft2019s voice-activated digital assistant  in Windows 10.
Microsoft2019s new Windows 10 system offers more personalization than before, but it also collects more data than people might be used to on PCs, from contacts and appointments to their physical location and even Wi-Fi passwords.

SAN FRANCISCO -- Microsoft's new Windows 10 system offers more personalization than before, but it also collects more data than people might be used to on PCs, from contacts and appointments to their physical location and even Wi-Fi passwords.
The information is used by Cortana, Microsoft's voice-activated digital assistant, and other new features that try to be helpful by remembering a user's likes and habits.
Apple and Google have developed similar services for smartphones in recent years.
Microsoft's new features are a big part of its strategy to make Windows more relevant in a world where people use multiple devices throughout the day.
Most of these features get turned on when you set up Windows 10 with the "Get going fast" option.
But you can take back control and disable features in the settings.
Here are some examples:
Wi-Fi worries
A feature called Wi-Fi Sense promises to make it easy for users and their friends to connect with new Wi-Fi networks.
It lets Windows 10 computers log in automatically to known networks, so your friends don't have to ask for the password when they visit.
Despite some initial reports, Wi-Fi Sense doesn't hand over your password to all your friends.
Instead, it stores your password online in an encrypted form.
It then provides that encrypted code to your friend's Windows 10 device so it can automatically log into your network.
Your friends never actually see the password, and Microsoft says your friends won't get access to other computers or files on the network.
Even so, critics say the feature shares too freely, as you can't choose which friends to share with 2014 only with your full list of friends or contacts on Facebook, Outlook.com or Skype.
To disable this, open the "Settings" menu in Windows 10, select "Network & Internet" and click on "Manage Wi-Fi Settings." You can uncheck groups you don't want to share with.
You can also choose not to share access to a particular network when you log in for the first time; just uncheck the box next to "Share network with my contacts."
But if you let friends manually log into your network by giving them your password, be aware they might be able to share the password via Wi-Fi Sense with their friends.
You can ask them not to, or completely block Wi-Fi Sense by changing your Wi-Fi network's name to include the underscore followed by these characters: optout.
Cortana knows you
Many people are used to voice-activated services like Apple's Siri or "OK Google" on smartphones and tablets.
Windows 10 brings Microsoft's digital assistant, Cortana, to desktops and laptops.
Cortana can answer questions, remind you of appointments and even recommend nearby restaurants.
But to do that, Cortana uploads and saves information about your Web browsing, search queries and location, as well as some details from your messages, contacts and calendar.
Microsoft says it doesn't use the Cortana personalization to target ads.
Nor will it use your emails, chats or personal files for advertising.
But it does tailor ads to websites visited with its Edge browser and queries made on its Bing search engine, including queries through Cortana.

You can review what Cortana knows about you: Click on the search field in the lower left of your screen, then click the "Notebook" icon and select "About Me" to edit or delete individual items.
If you want to turn Cortana off, open "Notebook," click on "Settings" and toggle Cortana to "Off." That clears information stored on the device, but not the data uploaded to Microsoft's servers.
To get to that, open "Notebook," choose "Settings" and click "Manage what Cortana knows about me in the cloud."
More privacy settings
Anyone concerned about privacy should take a run through the "Privacy" section of the Windows 10 "Settings" menu.
This is different from the "Settings" menu for Cortana.
You find it by clicking on the Windows icon in the lower left of your screen.
Windows 10 assigns each user on each device a unique "advertising ID," which lets app developers track how each person uses the device and apps.
If that bothers you, you'll find the button to turn it off by going to "Settings" and opening the "Privacy" section.
You might have to hit the back arrow at the top left if you're already in another section.
Click on "General" in the left-hand column to turn off advertising ID.
You might still get ads, but they won't be tailored to you.
Similarly, open "Privacy" and click on "Location" to turn off location tracking or clear the history of where you've traveled with your laptop, tablet or Windows phone.
Another heading under "Privacy" has the innocuous title of "Other devices." That's where you can turn off the ability to "Sync with devices." That feature lets apps on your device share information with things like store-tracking beacons, which send you ads as you walk nearby.
If that sounds creepy, turn it off.
Some critics complain that Microsoft hasn't been more up front about all the ways Windows 10 collects user information.
But you can find most of them by scrolling through the nooks and crannies of the "Settings" menu.
That's a good thing to do with any new software program or Internet service.
It's also good to go back there from time to time to make sure the settings match your comfort level.

2 jumbo phones from Samsung ahead of expected new iPhone, 2 jumbo phones from Samsung ahead of expected new iPhoneSAMSUNG has unveiled two new Android smartphones with jumbo screens as it seeks to recapture some of the sales lost to Apple after larger iPhones came out last year.
Samsung said Thursday that the new Galaxy Note 5 and S6 Edge Plus will start shipping Aug.
21 in the US and Canada.
Usually, Note phones don2019t come out until well after Apple2019s new iPhone models in September.
More about this report in Sun.Star Weekend's August 23, 2015 issue.
Read HERE if you missed the printed copy.
Saint Augustine Parish gears up for Jubilee year celebration, Saint Augustine Parish gears up for Jubilee year celebration
PAMPANGA.
Msgr.
Ric Serrano, Parish Pastoral Council coordinator Tess Laus and Archbishop Emeritus Paciano Aniceto sign the documents at the start of the Golden Jubilee Celebrations for Saint Augustine Parish and the dedication of the parish's new altar during the Solemnity of Saint Augustine on Friday, August 28, 2015.

Ian Ocampo Flora, IT WILL be a year-long celebration and observance of faith as  Saint Augustine Parish launched the year-long celebration of its Golden Jubilee celebration.
 
The celebration takes on a meaningful cue when the formal start of the activities were announced by parish priest Msgr.
Ric Serrano and Parish Pastoral Council coordinator Tess Laus as both urged the local congregation to look back into the 50 years of faithful service to God.
Leading this year's events was Archbishop Emeritus Paciano Aniceto who enthusiastically led the parish in the dedication of its new altar commissioned by the Parish Pastoral Council and their beloved parish priest.

This year's celebration will mark a turning point in the parish's history as church officers and the local faithful are urged to join in a celebration of faith, good works and programs for the development of the parish's apostolate and charitable works.

Mrs.
Laus was more than excited when she said that the parish officers will soon visit past priests of the parish to thank them for their past contribution to the parish.
 
The programs, Mrs.
Laus said, include charity works for the poor and other beneficiaries of the parish.
 A highlight that would surely please the local congregation would be the upcoming concert of the Philippine Madrigal Singers in November.
 
The MADZ, as they are colloquially called, are famous for their  repertoire of various styles and forms: Renaissance music, Classical music, Filipino and International folksongs, contemporary and avant-garde music, Opera and even popular music.
The parish will also be launching a renewed effort for community catechism of the Catholic youth in the community and those wanting to learn about the Catholic faith.
 
The move is part of the year-long program that aims to renew the faith and bring further understanding of the Catholic doctrines.
  
Archbishop Aniceto said that the word jubilee was derived from the an old Hebrew word that meant  2018ram's-horn trumpet.
The good Archbishop said that the parish should sound the celebration and make known its programs for the promotion of faith as though blowing the trumpet.
"A jubilee celebration should be joyful and anchored on faith.
 It is a celebration not just of the parish administration but also of the whole parish.
It's a celebration of faith," Archbishop Aniceto said.

The Golden Jubilee celebration will end in September 2016.
 Organizers are planning for the grand but meaning program to cap the event.

For comments, suggestions, violent reactions,invites, hate-mails, indignant rebuttals and what-have-you email the author at ianocampoflora@yahoo.com or call 0920-964-9664.
Biggest anime confab set, Biggest anime confab setTHE Best of Anime  is back.
Slated on September 19 to 20 at SMX Convention Center, SM Mall of Asia Complex, the BOA is now on its sixth year and continues to be one of the most anticipated anime conventions in the country for anime, manga and cosplay fanatics, gamers, figure collectors, photographers, artists, and general Japanophiles.
BOA is two whole days of fun, meeting fellow otakus, joining lots of contests, and learning more about the culture of Japan.
This year's special guests of international cosplayers and bands will highlight the event.
Activities include art competitions like the Quickdraw Competition where young and talented artists will compete for the title of fastest illustrator; the BOA Superstar where contestants take the stage and perform their own renditions of beloved Japanese songs; and the Battle of the Bands where aspiring rockstars get to perform covers of Japanese songs.
Cosplay highlights include: All-Star Cosplay Competition, where cosplayers compete with their costumes and skits; the BOAInter-School Cosplay Competition Finals, where winners from different schools battle it out; and the World Cosplay Summit , where winners will fly to Japan to represent the Philippines.
Guests include returning performers and crowd favorite, Uchuu Sentai NOIZ, STARMARIE, and Joe Inoue.
First time guest performer will be famous Japanese songstress Eir Aoi who sang the theme songs for Sword Art Online, Mobile Suit Gundam AGE, and Fate/Zero.
Guest cosplayers include Hane*Ann from Taiwan, Sara Tousa Bao from Singapore, and Hyko from Taiwan who currently holds the 4th spot in WorldCosplay.com ranking.

BOA is part of the Manila International Book Fair slated on September 16 to 20.
Another event taking place is the first ever DigiTech Manila Conference and Expo, where it will be the largest gathering of digital technology leaders, experts, and practitioners in education.
DigiTech is slated on September 17 to 18.
For details, call 896-0661 or 896-0682, or e-mail bookfair@primetradeasia.com.

 The engineering grad is now an executive chef ,  The engineering grad is now an executive chef 
Chef Alex Villacastin Destriza.

Ivy C.
Tejano, MEET executive sous chef Alex Villacastin Destriza, who was just chosen for the position at Marco Polo Hotel Davao.
 
His colleagues believe that his passion for his career, teamwork, excellence and nurturing personal relationship with people will surely give the Marco Polo Davao2019s guests a whole new dining experience.
 Born in Bantayan Island in Cebu City on January 7, 1978, Destriza is an Associate in Marine Engineering graduate from the University of Cebu in 1996.
 
Destriza said his interest in cooking started when he was in college.
He believes his working experience from Jollibee to French Baker, Red Ribbon, and other food chains, has led him to his career now.
 
201cI don2019t know how to explain it, but I enjoy cooking as much as I enjoy good food until such time na napamahal na sa akin ang pagluluto,201d Destriza said.
 
Destriza spent his formative years as a culinary practitioner in Davao City when former chef Eduardo Tuazon gave him the chance to work at the Marco Polo Davao.
 
201cWhen the Marco Polo opened in 1988, kinuha ako ni chef Tuazon, who has been my mentor in cooking.
He inspired me to do more in this field and I thanked him dahil hindi ko ito mararating kung wala siya para tulungan ako,201d he said.
 
Destriza is not new in Marco Polo Davao.
He has been a senior cook and a junior sous chef of the hotel from 1998-2003 before he left for Ireland.
 
His experienced at Imperial Hotel in Garvagh in Northern Ireland from 2004-2005 has opened doors for new learning and opportunities when he returned to the Philippines.
 
Destriza worked at the Peninsula Manila from 2006-2015 as Senior Sous Chef de Tournant before his appointment as executive sous chef in Marco Polo Davao.
 
201cThis is the third time na bumalik ako ng Marco Polo Davao.
Executive sous chef is the second highest position for the chefs.
For me, this is an opportunity na mahirap tanggihan,201d Destriza said.
 
Despite the heavy responsibilities on his shoulders, the exec sous chef never had a thought of quitting, adding that he loves his job, and he is already happy and fulfilled with what he had attained in life.
 
In fact, Destriza said, he is excited to take the Marco Polo Davao2019s dining outlets to greater heights with his signature dishes that are reflective of Davao2019s appeal, uniqueness and flavor.
 
Schedules have been hectic, Destriza added, but he makes sure he leads a balanced life along with his wife and three daughters.

Levelling up the ante in community service, Levelling up the ante in community serviceRuji Peter S.
Abat, SUN.STAR Davao continues to display its commitment to serve the community not only on providing quality information, but through its various corporate social responsibility  projects that the company has embarked on.
And as it celebrates its 20th anniversary, Sun.Star Davao is poised to take its service to a higher level.
Beyond the reach of its newspapers, Sun.Star Davao, for instance, has served the community in a more concrete manner since the company kicked off with its adopt-a-school program and adopt-a-student scholarship program.
"Our five-year contract for the adopt-a-site were we conducted our tree-planting activities has already expired so we came up with another program.
So this time around, we want to show that Sun.Star Davao values the education of our youth hence, we had the adopt-a-school and adopt-a-student scholarship," human resource supervisor Vic L.
Purgatorio said.
Late in 2014, Sun.Star Davao distributed school supplies in a far-flung school in Arakan, North Cotabato.
For this year, meanwhile, the company launched its adopt-a-school program at the Tibi-Tibi Elementary School in Barangay Sto.
Ni\xf1o, Talaingod, Davao del Norte, where a total of 600 packs filled with school supplies were given to the students there.
For the adopt-a-student scholarship program, on the other hand, the company has chosen an indigenous people  student as the beneficiary.
To date, Sun.Star Davao has been supporting Maria Charisma Dy, a grade 4 student of Manuel L.
Quezon Elementary School.
"We chose her because for one, she can't afford going to school and it is only his mother who is raising her since her father, as her mother claims, is a drunkard and doesn't fulfill his obligations.
We see a lot of potential in her since she is the top student in the class," Purgatorio said.
He also said that if Dy continues her excellent performance in school, the scholarship program will run until she graduates high school or even college.

Dy, Purgatorio added, may also be a potential employee of Sun.Star Davao if she chooses to.
To provide quality printing of its products, the company recently acquired the Global web machine to replace the otherwise old Goss web machine which the company had been using for more than a decade.
Purgatorio said the machine's acquisition is a significant addition to the company's assets as it promises to provide the readers a more refined and clearer printing quality while it also ensures a more speedy production of copies.
Behind the company's commitment to public service, however, are the employees who have dedicated their time and effort to assure that the community is being served well.
Hence, Purgatorio said the company has also set aside various activities for Sun.Star Davao's employees that included the Palarong Pinoy 2015 held at the People's Park and the Employee's Day and team-building activities at the Island Garden City of Samal.
Sun.Star Davao has been serving the community for two decades and it is poised to up the ante for the years to come.
Davao's modern landmark now rising , Davao's modern landmark now rising Nelson C.
Bagaforo, DAVAO City's most modern landmark, the Aeon Towers, is now rising and will soon be a home to many who have dreamed of luxurious and comfortable condominium living in the metropolis.
"We shall offer what would embody the future's high standard quality of condominium living in Davao City," Ian Cruz, chief executive officer of FTC Group of Companies, developer of the 33-storey Aeon Towers, earlier said, when the development project was still being conceptualized.
He assured, then, that Aeon Towers will "improve people's perception of high end condominium urban living and will provide a peek of what the 21st century condominium living in Davao City will look like."
True enough, the promise is now being realized.
The FTC Group stands true to its promise to complete this ambitious P3.2 billion condo project before 2016 ends.
"We are still on track in terms of our target.
The building construction will be completed as scheduled by December 2016.
By then, the units are ready for turnover to buyers," said Aeon Towers marketing head Genefel Marchan.
Once completed, it can definitely claim to be the highest structure in the city.

Aeon Towers is being developed as a high-end project complete with prime amenities and a majestic view of Davao Gulf and Mt.
Apo.

It is touted as a green building with smart home technology.
Equipped with Fiber Optics on all units and free Wifi Spot.
It has a hotel-like luxury lobby lounge, four spacious high-speed elevators for condo use and all the facilities will be provided for every condo units.
Aeon Towers will have an advance fire protection, alarm and sprinkler system, reliable back-up power supply, and 24 hours CCTV Security Camera.
It is an iconic building with LED lights that will glimmer at night and the looks will surely captivate Dabawenyos.
"The Aeon Towers is a structure that will embody the spirit of residents of Davao, towering over the Davao City landscape.
A monolith that stands for the endless possibilities that life in the fast evolving city has to offer.
It is a perfect balance between boldness and tradition, between a carefree lifestyle and a progressive mindset," Cruz had said.
Strategically located at the heart of Davao City's commercial hub on JP Laurel ave.
in Bajada, Aeon Towers is touted to be the next iconic symbol of the city and the most ambitious, so far.
Development works onsite are in full swing.
With almost 400 workers, construction of the tower is going non-stop on a 24-hour shift.
"We're almost done with underground works.
The four-level basement parking is almost complete," Marchan said.
She said construction of the podium or the ground level up to the second and third levels of the tower has also started.
"The basement structure is well planned and we make sure it will hold the 33-storey tower, plus it is also our parking area for the whole building," Marchan said.
Aeon Towers training head Al Punzalan said underground works, including the construction of the basement parking took them 18 months to finish.
"It was the reason kung bakit wala pang nakikitang structure in the past months.
Tinatrabaho pa 'yong ilalim.
And this is the only structure in the city na may four-level basement parking," he said.
With massive development works onsite, Marchan and Punzalan are optimistic it won't take a year before the 466-unit tower is sold out.
The force behind Sun.Star Davao, The force behind Sun.Star DavaoNelson C.
Bagaforo, HE WAS already there when Sun.Star Davao was born 20 years ago, making sure everything was in order and every member of family did his/her job.
  
Orlando P.
Carvajal, then president of a local bank Banco Davao, was already president of Ang Peryodiko Dabaw, before the Garcias of Cebu City acquired majority ownership of the publication and re-named it to what it is now -- Sun.Star Davao -- in 1995.
OPC, as he is fondly called, was retained as its president and given a free hand to look after its over-all operation and to make the paper to be at par, at least, with its mother publication Sun.Star Cebu, the leading community newspaper in the Visayas in terms of readership and advertising revenues.
He imposed policies in a bid to produce a daily newspaper that is of better quality in terms of printing, well-read and a profitable business.
And in doing so, he made sure that paper should come first before any other newspapers hit the streets of Davao City.
OPC strictly implemented these polices and encouraged all employees to strive harder for excellence.
"Having OPC being the leader, you have to make sure you do whatever it takes so the cow doesn't fall into the ditch again, otherwise he will do a lecture on insanity the whole day.
As his subordinate, you have to be equally quick in getting things done.
The mentoring, knowledge and even the discipline given to me was paramount," said Tessie Pa\xf1a, Sun.Star Davao general manager.
But not only that.
OPC made sure he had a hand in every aspect of the newspaper operation, from printing to its advertising and content.
He wanted the product to be perfect, if not almost.
While doing so, he never forgot his working staff.
Under his helm, Sun.Star employees have become the highest paid in the industry in this part of the country.
He also made sure workers' benefits are provided for and security contributions are promptly remitted.
"As a leader of SSD for almost two decades, OPC created a culture of involvement and commitment.
His involvement was so intent and his commitment was authentic.
He was so concern of the future of the company that's why he makes sure no time was wasted in managing opportunities and challenges," Pa\xf1a said.
OPC, is indeed, the force behind Sun.Star who helped the paper in its journey to where it is now.
He retired in 2012 and has remained a consultant for the company.
He has been replaced by equally-dynamic president Gina Garcia Atienza.
"Just like a child, SSD is nurtured with both parents.
OPC was a disciplinarian.
He created a bridge of discipline that made us cross to where we are right now, stable and enjoying victories.
Ma'am Gina as a mother inspires everyone to focus on their strength.
Supervisors feel they can make decisions without having to get approval every step of the way.
She is a president who assured everyone that it's alright to take risks and make some mistakes," Pa\xf1a said.
Building communities for 20 years now, Building communities for 20 years nowNelson C.
Bagaforo, FOR 20 years now, a national player in property development has remained confident in the potential of Davao City's property market.
It is among a few players that weathered the challenging times in the past, including the 1997 Asian financial crunch that obviously had adverse effects on real estate industry that time.
Camella Davao, a subsidiary of the country's largest homebuilder, Vista Land, which is controlled by the family of former senator Manuel Villar, was then establishing its mark in the Davao market when the crisis struck that prompted property developers to put their projects on hold.
Camella was unfazed and went on with its first residential development in the city -- the master-planned Caribbean-themed community called Solariega in Talomo.
Because Solariega offered a new concept in residential development, it didn't take long before the project's first phase was sold out.
This development project was immediately followed by another master-planned mid-end residential project in Puan, the grand Italian-inspired Toscana.
Another horizontal project followed, this time in Mintal, the Mediterranean-inspired Cerritos, which is at present undergoing expansion.
But even before Cerritos, Camella embarked on a multi-billion vertical residential project, the British-inspired Camella Northpoint, a condominium complex located in the emerging business center in the city's southern district in Bajada.

Northpoint is Vista Land,s first condominium project outside Metro Manila.
Five years after the project was launched, the complex is now home to four mid-rise condo buildings, comprising of 898 units.
The construction of another 10-storey residential building is set to start in the second quarter of 2015 with at least 300 units.
"Our presence in Davao City only proves how confident we are in the city's growth potential.
We want to be part of its growing economy and we are bent to dominate the market by providing quality yet affordable housing to Dabawenyos," former senator Manuel Villar said during the lunch of their first township project in the city -- the Camella Davao located in Communal in Buhangin District.
This 35-hectare development, which comprises from low-end to high-end residential component, a commercial center, a park, church, school and other amenities, is in partnership with the family of Compostela Valley Gov.
Arturo "Chiongkee" Uy.
Development works for this project starts in early 2015.

"Davao City is among the focus areas of our massive expansion at present.
We want to take advantage of its growing property market," Villar assured.
in doing so, Vista Land is infusing P30 to P40 billion from its capital expenditures in the next five to six years, which will include investments for shopping malls and lifestyle centers that will be developed in its existing and new projects in the city.
Other than Davao City, Camella is also expanding in nearby cities of Tagum, General Santos City and Koronadal, where it already has existing master-planned development projects.
For the first semester of 2015, Camella Davao is set to lunch more big projects in the city, including the development of another township to rise in the 130-hectare property in Catigan, Toril area.
Development works are also set to start simultaneous with the Communal township.
Another condominium project will also be developed in Ma-a.
"In Toril project, we will introduce Lessandra, a townhouse model which is very affordable that fits those migrating in the city and starting family who want to own a house," said Marlon Nino Escalicas, Camella South-Central Mindanao Cluster head, referring to a new market segment that is emerging in the city -- the affordable market.
The emergence of this market segment is triggered by entry of more big companies engaged in manufacturing and service sector that generate thousands of jobs in the city.
Escalicas said they are also taking advantage of the growing investors market which comprises a bulk of their buyers, particularly for their condo units.
"Most of our buyers are actually not end-users but investors who are also looking at the demand for housing to grow further," Escalicas said.
"Camella's respectable image in property development, this market segment is aware it will not be difficult for them to look for renters once the units are turned over to them," he added.
The winningest, The winningestNelson C.
Bagaforo, FOR 20 years now, Sun.Star Davao, formerly Ang Peryodiko Dabaw, has continued to touch the lives of Dabawenyos, providing them information that reflects the way they live and updating them on the burning issues of the day while stirring their interests in various fields.
During the period, the paper became a member of the Sun.Star Publications Network and experienced various innovations, mainly improved design and content, making the paper not only the most reliable source of news and data, but a local daily which has the most incisive, latest and best presented news matched with a refreshing reader-friendly layout.
All these efforts, which seek to enrich the lives of Dabawenyos by offering them new, quality and innovative ways of staying informed and entertained, did not go unnoticed, as proven by distinctions and awards the paper had received throughout these years.

Its brand of excellence has continued to get the nod of award-giving bodies not only in the local scene, but also in the national arena.
In 20 years of its existence, this paper has been bestpwed a total of 71 awards and prizes from different award-giving bodies, both local and national, for features, photojournalism, news, and opinions and 27 prizes in sports features, news, and photos.

Indeed, Sun.Star Davao established its stature as the most awarded local daily in this part of the country.
This year, the paper was once again recognized in the prestigious Civic Journalism Awards, bestowed by the Philippine Press Institute, for its exemplary coverage and reporting on business and economy, besting other community papers from all over the country.
Sun.Star Davao was cited for "consistent high quality of writing and editing of its stories.
Sun.Star Davao editor-in-chief Stella Estremera also won this year in the European Union  Peace Journalism Awards for her story "Rituals for Peace." She also won the Best News Story in the 1st Sarihay Media Awards for her story "Davao Gulf: Rich Spawning Ground." 
In 2005, Sun.Star Davao and its Sunday edition Weekend, made history when it won a total of four major awards in the prestigious Philippine Press Institute Konrad Adenauer Stiftung  Annual Community Press Awards when it grabbed the most number of awards won by a community paper in a single year.
That year, in the daily category, Sun.Star Davao was adjudged Best Edited Community Paper, Best in Business and Economic Reporting and Best in Photojournalism.
Sun.Star Davao Weekend, which won the Best Edited Weekly Community Paper in 2001, was picked Best in Photojournalism.
The year 1999 marked the start of the paper's harvest of awards when it swept the 1st Davao City Catholic Mass Media Awards  winning a total of five awards including the Special Centennial Award.

In 2000, Sun.Star Davao won its first Best Edited Daily Community Paper award from PPI-KAS, at the same time dominated anew the 2nd DCCMMA, winning five more awards, including the Special Jubilee Award.

Since then, the paper has been consistently winning in various competitions.

Sun.Star Davao has earned the distinction the people behind it have long aspired for.
There were many victories won, but it will not sleep on its laurels.
It will continue to be a work-in-progress, imbibing a culture rooted in excellence and innovation that will bring the best in its employees as it looks forward to meeting greater challenger lying ahead.
Making a name in IT, Engineering, Making a name in IT, EngineeringKriztja Marae G.
Labrador, OVER the years, Davao City does not only excel in agriculture and tourism industry, to name a few, but is also starting to make a name for itself as a new destination for engineering and information technology .
For engineering, the University of Mindanao  Team UMyong, an all-male group of 12 mechanical engineering students, who represented the city in the last Shell Eco Marathon Asia 2015 held at Rizal Park in Manila last February 25 to 28.
Out of the more than 100 teams who participated in the event, 30 were from the Philippines and only three teams came from Mindanao.

The contest, according to Team UMyong manager Francis Justine Sombillo, aims at looking for car models that can go further by using less fuel.
For their debut participation, the team having only limited resources and support built their eco-car model named "Lumad" under the prototype-gasoline category from parts where they got from the junkshop.

Sombillo said they named their car "Lumad" to represent not only UM but also Davao.
Even though they didn't win, they were still proud as their eco-car made with parts from the junkshop and powered by a Skygo scooter engine had competed with entries from other countries during the contest and has reached a decent mileage of 60 to 80 km per 1 liter of gasoline.
"We can say that there is really a gap in technology between the Philippines and other countries but we take this as a challenge," he said, adding that the next team from UM who will be competing is now modifying their model to improve it.
For the IT industry, Davao City-based Ingenuity Global Consulting Inc., a top web and mobile software development agency created "Hackademy," a two-week web programming camp to support the budding young talents develop their skills, as a part of their Corporate Social Responsibility project
Ingenuity Business Development and Community Manager Victor C.
Sapar said that "it involves high school students and out-of-school youth among target beneficiaries and potentially contributes to preparing K-12 graduates for information technology jobs."
Sapar said their first training had 15 Grades 9 and 10 students from the Philippine Science High School-Southern Mindanao Campus as the company's Founder and CEO, John Naranjo is a PhilSci alumnus himself.
Naranjo wanted to open Hackademy to deserving students there who need further honing on their skills on computer languages.
Ingenuity fielded a team of five graduates from Hackademy and competed in the weekend hackathon with more than a hundred IT professionals during the recent Angel Hack Davao in August 15-16, 2015, Angel Hack is among the most prestigious hackathons held globally.

"We aim to develop partnerships with kindred non-government and private organizations to enrich the project and allow us to either subsidize the training courses or offer them for free.
As a software development agency, Ingenuity intends to develop a technology platform to allow easier and wider access to the courses in fun and innovative ways," he said, referring to their future plans for the project.
The Graduates, The GraduatesPEOPLE do come and go, so they say.
Sun.Star babies, they call themselves, the graduates will always be forever grateful for having their skills honed by strict, but most of the time, good-humored editors who are mistaken for old, heartless bosses who yield their pens like lightsabers to young and inexperienced reporters.
Wherever they go, ingrained so deep within their hearts that once upon a time, they entered the newsroom of Sun.Star Davao.
*****
"Sun.Star Davao has taught me that respecting and being understanding to other people, even though you do not regularly meet them, will eventually bloom into a good friendship." -- RJ Lumawag, former business reporter
"Getting my article published during my first week of work was definitely an amazing experience! It was a concrete motivation for me to continuously sharpen my writing skills.
With the help of my editors, I can say that I really learned a lot - something which I will forever cherish and be thankful about being part of the Sunstar family." -- Jenny M.
Mendoza, former business reporter 
"My coverage in Upper Dado, Alamada, South Cotabato in February 2012 was unforgettable.
Together with some Coca-Cola staff and an environmental group, we had a trek for more than three hours and climbed a steep slope that was 100-meter high just to turnover the ram pump water system to the residents.
The coverage in Sitio Patag in Brgy Marilog, Marilog District where I got the chance to interview the 2014 Ramon Magsaysay Awardee Teacher Randy Halasan was also the most unforgettable experience I had as a reporter in SunStar Davao.
It was very challenging because we had to ride on a habal-habal motorcycle and pass through a stiff, rocky, uphill road for more than an hour.
I realized that Mr.
Halasan deserves to be awarded for doing such sacrifice every day.
Aside from these challenging coverages, what is more memorable in my four years with Sunstar Davao is the presswork at the office where everybody gets to eat together and laugh at each other while cramming for deadline.
Despite the challenges and stressors in life and at work, Sunstar Davao helped me grow as strong person.
There were times when I cried my heart out because I felt like I could not make it anymore.
But, because in my four years with Sunstar Davao I was surrounded by people whom I consider as my second family, I grew up as a better person.
Sunstar Davao is my first love.
" -- Arrianne Caryl Casas, former City Hall reporter
"It was the last Wednesday of January 2012, and the day dawned gloomy and cold.
On this day, I entered Sun.Star Davao's newsroom not for the first time but for the third time already.
 How the day's climate turned out to be did not help ease out the worry I felt within.
Yet, I clung to my only hope that I would land this job this time around.
 I thanked the heavens when Ma'am Donna told me that the editor-in-chief Ma'am Stella would meet me up after completing the IQ and EQ tests.
Right then, I sensed something good was about to happen this time.
My hunch was right! Yes, I got my first job.
And for my first assignments: the teachers who passed the licensure exam and the city's streetfood vendors.
More than the experience though, that feeling of having just landed your first serious job and being recognized for your work was something that would bring me with so much joy and happiness to this day and beyond.
That, for me, is unforgettable.
I'm a proud Sun.Star baby!" -- Antonio L.
Colina IV
The workforce: Striving for excellence, The workforce: Striving for excellenceKriztja Marae G.
Labrador, FOR 20 years, Sun.Star Davao has been operating as a daily local community newspaper in this part of the country, giving its readers only the best of the best content from local news, lifestyle features, entertainment, sports, columns and a whole lot more.
It has continued to strive for excellence, giving utmost importance to its partners for growth, including its people, readers and advertisers.
And each issue and this community paper and other products published by the company, such as the annual Davao Yearbook, are a collaborative efforts from all of its departments, each taking part to Sun.Star Davao's success.
As the anniversary celebration continues, here's a glimpse of each of the publication's department.
Marketing and circulation
Known as the "lifeblood" of a newspaper because its main task is to make sure that the paper is well-marketed and -circulated, Sun.Star Davao general manager Tessie A.
Pa\xf1a shared that their journey towards the transition of the trend from print to digital has been quite a challenge that they have embraced.
But she was quick to add that although some national papers have been affected with this change, Sun.Star Davao, as a community newspaper, stood strong along with the continuous economic progress of Davao City where a lot of sectors and big investors still want to get involved with.
"Through this digital boom, we have created new sources of revenue, presented unique contents and repackaged our marketing offers.
We continue to innovate," she said.

As the company continues to publish daily newspapers, it also has a website and an e-paper version for its growing digital audience.
For marketing, Pa\xf1a also bared that Sun.Star Davao continues to capture 70 percent of advertising market share in Davao City with its growing readership as shown by the recent survey conducted by Ateneo de Davao University.

The survey showed that Sun.Star Davao and Sun.Star Davao Superbalita reached 40.9% readership among other local newspapers in Davao.
As Sun.Star Davao goes "Up," she added that their future plans are still on coming up with more innovations that will suit its readers and the changing times.
The editorial
The producer of the newspaper's content, Sun.Star Davao editor-in-chief Stella A.
Estremera said that as the department's leader, "the constant challenge is enabling the department to produce quality reports and stimulate the passion of the staff towards their tasks."
The department also has different sections: the field reporters, who are the ones going on field to get the news or feature materials; the editors, the ones who edits the reporter's articles; the layout artists, the ones who arrange the papers content and beautifies the paper; the proofreaders, the ones who make sure that the paper's content are text error free.

As a daily, the pressure is really in the editorial department especially in the afternoons wherein everyone is expected to submit their reports before the set deadline.
But despite the pressure, "creating good, highly productive citizens," is what Estremera said when asked on what has been their greatest achievement.
Fast forwarding for future plans, Estremera has vowed that the department will continue to pursue "to always be the best."
The production
The "all-nighter" department who makes sure that Sun.Star Davao's newspapers hit the streets first before others.
Pa\xf1a said the recent challenge is to produce colorful and quality printed paper to compete with what online contents can offer.
With this and in order to be able to keep up with the growing demand, Sun.Star Davao recently upgraded its printing machine.

Pa\xf1a shared that the upgraded machine's speed is triple than the old one which means it can print more in a shorter period of time.
For future plans, other than the newly acquired machine, she said that they are continuously aligning the operations of the production department to the business strategy of the company.
The accounting
The department responsible for the company's finances, check and balancing profit and expenses, this department has a lot of math to deal with on a daily basis.
Sun.Star Davao's accounting supervisor Lovella Panio said that two of the challenges are in compromising existing systems and policies so as to provide assistance for various departments and strictness in budgeting funds.
"Our purpose is for accountability and our duty is to count up to the last centavo," she explained.
For their plans, Panio said that they will still continue to strive to manage all the lapses that they have seen and continue to "strengthen the company's internal control for the good of everyone."
Credit and collection
The department responsible for billing and collecting customers' payments, credit and collection supervisor Andrew Leo Ocot shared that some of the challenges are hitting the set collection period and dealing with account complications.
Patience is indeed important under this department as they have to constantly deal with different customers during their collection day and making sure that they are paying right.
Included in their future plans, according to Ocot are for the improvement of their terms policy and having "more trainings for collectors to improve skills and to learn strategies in collection."
The human resource
The last but not the least, when all the departments are under pressure and stress, the HR department comes to the rescue.
With its role to ensure the welfare of Sun.Star Davao employees, HR supervisor Vic L.
Purgatorio said that other than dealing with hard-headed employees being a challenge, they still make sure that all of the employee benefits are provided for.
They also organize programs such as inter-department tournaments and team building to distress employees from work and encourage them to build more teamwork within the different departments.
Purgatorio also shared that they also take part in looking for community projects that the company can get involved in towards helping others like the current student scholar that Sun.Star Davao sends to school.
For their plans, he said that they will still continue to create more fun activities for the employees to participate.

The sports: Where the action is, The sports: Where the action isMarianne L.
Saberon-Abalayan, I HAVE been into sportswriting for good 17 years, the first two years from 1999 to 2000 I was just a sports correspondent of Sun.Star Davao.
But I started as a cub reporter of the paper in 1997, covering the general beat.
I also had a short stint with Sun.Star General Santos, also in the general beat.
But when I returned to Davao, an opportunity paved its way for me to start writing sports having joined the Sports Development Division of the City Mayor's Office as a feature writer.
So I started contributing sports news to Sun.Star Davao then later rejoined the paper in January 2001 as a sports beat reporter under the late veteran journalist Daddy Ram Maxey.

It was Daddy Ram who opened my eyes to the beauty of sportswriting.
Sports is so rich with drama, action, thrill, excitement, conflict and fun.
I was not really familiar with the lingo being used in different sports but I learned by studying every day, reading sports stories, watching games and listening to commentators on TV and covering actual competitions.
I also listened and learned so much more from Daddy Ram.
Covering sports made me go to places abroad that I never imagined going before - Darwin City in Northern Territory, Australia in 2001 for the Arafura Games; baseball study tour in Osaka and Tokyo, Japan in 2012; and Labuan, Malaysia for the 8th BIMP Eaga Friendship Games last December.

But more memorable coverages were those of Davao City athletes' campaigns in national  from the first time I covered them and make names for themselves in their respective events make me so proud to have been a part of their colorful careers.
Indeed, I had so many memorable experiences in sports.
How could I forget traveling by bus going to Tubod, Lanao del Norte by myself for the inaugural staging of the Mindanao Friendship Games in 2002, seeing tanks and soldiers within the world-class sports complex for the entire duration of the games was really scary.
During the opening ceremonies, then President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo arrived via chopper to give her keynote address in fluent Visayan and Philippine Star reporter Joey Villar asking me to translate it for him.

Seeing and chronicling the glorious journey of Philippine diving queen Sheila Mae Perez of Sasa who won three gold medals at the Trace Aquatics Center in Laguna during the Southeast Asian Games in 2003 was just phenomenal.
 
Then, of course, my face-to-face encounter with my Triggerman Allan Caidic of my favorite San Miguel Beer team of old in the 2004 PBA All-Star Weekend in Cebu City really thrilled me .
He was part of the PBA Legends team.
I was billeted at the Waterfront Hotel in Lahug where the rest of the PBA All Stars also stayed.
I dined with them, rode the bus with them going to the playing venue and filed my stories with Jimmy Alapag beside me at the business center.
I think it was my kumpare Peter June Simon's first All-Star appearance.
Having our eight-division world boxing champion Manny Pacquaio guest in the Davao Sportswriters Association  Forum when he was still starting as a pro boxer is worth remembering.
Interviewing him in person and watching him play basketball at Almendras Gym is also unforgettable.
So many young sports stars from Davao City have emerged over the years since I covered four Palarong Pambansa, five National Prisaa Finals, two Batang Pinoy National Games, three Mindanao Friendship Games, one Palaro ng Bayan, two BIMP-Eaga Friendship Games, one Arafura Games and numerous city and regional competitions of various sports.
  
When I was promoted as sports editor in November 2011, I still go where the action is.

Now, I still look forward to more coverages, more success stories to tell and more places to go, by the grace of God.
Sports is still the best beat to cover! Never mind hours under the scorching heat of the sun or being rain-soaked or bothered by black bugs or malipasan ng gutom covering late night games.
It's really worth it.
For info, we are still hiring for a sports reporter.
The justice beat: Amid the grueling legal terms, The justice beat: Amid the grueling legal termsRhealyn C.
Pojas, YOU need to understand yourself first before you should demand to be understood by others.
That's the thought that sinks through my mind as I try to recall what my days as a reporter assigned to cover the justice beat are like.
I have come to realize that certain level of understanding is necessary to be achieved and this begins in the writer.
If one cannot reach this point of understanding then it is impossible to expect readers to understand what you are trying to convey.
Thanks to the editors who are there to back me up when the words I had sewn together to write the story seemed to rumble with each other.
Never mind the day when a storm of writ of amparo, habeas data, in abeyance, moot and other legal terms come flooding your mind, leaving your brain a little woozy at times while reading resolutions, decisions, or orders coming from the court.

It is given that the beat is very technical and being new to this craft is not an excuse because it is part of your job to convey to the readers whatever data you gathered in the simplest form.
You have to write it too in the shortest time possible as deadline is a relentless enemy you would have to beat every day.
You need to carry that weight on your shoulders while striving to be accurate, unbiased, ethical and legal at the same time.

But there is always that rewarding feeling after I have seen the story I have written being printed in the newspaper.
In just that instant, all the dramas I had experienced upon stitching the data together suddenly fades i to oblivion.
What will then remain are the values and lessons you I had taken out of those experience.
   
Indeed, writing the story is a different thing and experiencing it happened before your eyes is another.
The awe of watching the action in progress is a luxury to keep and the lessons you earned along the way is something you will carry on for the rest of your life.
And there's the realization that even the stories you are writing have their own stories and that the moment the ink strikes the paper, you give birth to a new chapter of history.

I admit that as a young reporter, I have asked both wise and stupid questions and cried and laugh at those, but the bottomline is, I have learned from each mistake.
There is so much to learn yet.
Amid all the drama, one line that fuels me to continue this path I pursue is from my favorite poem Desiderata by Max Erhmann which goes this way: "Keep interested in your own career, however humble, it's a real possession in the changing fortunes of time."
So now, I just have to enjoy the front seat to history as my days as a reporter goes on.
The governance: The long wait isn't over yet Karina Ca\xf1edo, The governance: The long wait isn't over yet Karina Ca\xf1edoKarina V.
Canedo, COVERING local governance is not an easy job.
It entails a lot of patience and persistence.
You need to have pools of curiosity within you to be aware of the latest issues confronting the community that serves as basis in pursuing the story.
Understanding issues sometimes take a lot of time for me because some of these have long stretches of origin and some of its details need research not just electronically but also by asking other proper sources.
 
Upon the time I started, I observed other reporters how they interview, particularly on how to get the right information and tried to apply it to myself.

Developing a routine on how to get news was a hard act to do during my first month in the beat.

Even if Davao is my birthplace, and has been my dwelling place for four years, I am not well versed on its offices even its streets.
But then with the help of my fellow reporters, I found my way to seek the right people in right places to ask for whenever information I need for my stories.
My regular routine in the beat includes attending the flag ceremony every Monday and the city council regular session on Tuesdays.
I also do a round of different offices at the City Hall on Wednesdays, go to I-Speak media forum on Thursdays and on Fridays I go back to doing my visits to different city offices.

As for my sources, I've experienced a lot and long wait is a very common thing, I was surprised at first, but I used to later on and considered it as just part of a reporter's life.
Anyway, some of these officials, considering their busy schedules, can only be interviewed once in a while.
It's also quite a challenge to be on time, the need to be there when important announcements, like that of a city mayor, are made.
But you always need to adjust to them because, I believe, these news sources will never adjust to you.

Being late is very crucial, since you do not only miss what the sources had said but the way these details that you needs in your story are delivered, You need to understand the context of that source.
Interviewing sources is also challenge as it measures how abreast are you of the story you want to pursue.

Apparently, I could say that being a governance beat reporter would be harder if you do not care a single thing about the city, but I guess it's not a hard thing to do on my part.
I had grown to love Davao more because of this job, and surely I guess it would still continue as I am here trying my best to always give the people the information they need to know.

Being a governance beat reporter made me appreciate how precious the city is, how its people deserve so much.

As a reporter I can say that I also commit mistakes sometimes and I learn from it every time.
I do not just give up.
I know for a fact that as a cub reporter, I have so many things to improve but either way I think that it is my love for my craft that makes me think that I can last in this job.

The defense: From games to crimes, The defense: From games to crimesKarlo Paolo R.
Pates, MY TRANSITION from my previous assignment to cover sports to the defense beat just went on smoothly.
Covering different sports disciplines was quite challenging but I never thought taking over the defense beat was more than what I thought it would be.
I was hesitant at first to handle a tougher responsibility, particularly on doing accurate reportage in crime incidents, maybe because I had carelessly done some mistakes in my previous assignment, specifically on the misspelled names of some sources.
I was afraid I might make the same mistakes again especially in the sensitive topics of abuses and other criminal acts.
But I took it more as challenge for myself to improve.
At first, I had difficulty getting meaty stories since I have yet to establish the proper news sources.
I did just rely on police blotters, press statements and briefings of the AFP-PNP Press Corps.
But after several weeks I became more oriented on what stories should be developed and written.
I already gained more contacts from different offices and groups that made my work easier.
The transition became easier since I was also guided by senior reporters from TV, radio, and even reporters from other newspapers.
While covering in the field, I experienced both the truth and lies and even the propagandas, but I just learned to rely on my facts.
After more than four months in the beat, I feel really challenged and excited for more things that will come my way.

What excites me is that I get to cover action stories like rallies staged by militant groups, raids and operations conducted by both the police and the Army.
Sometimes I also worry on my security since I get to report the names of criminals, including those big-time personalities, but I always feel confident and optimistic as long as I'm just doing my work correctly and in the right manner.
So far, the biggest coverage that I was part of was the simultaneous drug raids last July in Davao City where 39 drug pushers were arrested while nine others neutralized in the joint operation conducted by law enforcement agencies in the city.
Another highlight coverage for me is the botched rescue operation organized by law enforcement agencies as they tried to extract lumad bakwits seeking refuge inside the UCCP Haran in Davao City that resulted in a commotion where 10 tribal leaders and two police officers were injured.
This kind of coverage enabled me to grow as a reporter as it gives me more knowledge and confidence to do more and be able to pursue stories amid certain circumstances.

Aside from covering stories in my regular beat, I became more immersed in writing uplifting community stories with the help our editors.
Just recently, I did cover the 6th Ramon Aboitiz Foundation Inc.
 Triennial Awards in Cebu City where top individuals and organizations were recognized for their respective contributions to change the lives of people from the communities where they came from.
It did open my eyes to look for these kind of stories that would not only promote good news but also institute social change in their own respective manner.
It also made me realize that there are interesting and heart-warming stories that we can highlight.
It's something that I will look to develop in my continuing journey as a reporter for print.

Covering for SuperB: Every day is an exciting day, Covering for SuperB: Every day is an exciting dayJeepy P.
Compio, COVERING for a Cebuano-tabloid Sun.Star SuperBalita can be one of the most challenging, but rewarding.
It's basically covering the police, making sure the biggest breaking news stories can land on its news pages.
And it isn't easy.
Covering the crime beat is demanding and often stressful, and as a reporter it takes time, patience and skill to get the authorities to trust you enough to give you information.

On my first day in the beat on December 22, 2012, it was mixed emotions -- I wanted to cry, my heart was beating fast.
I was nervous.
There were a lot of things running on my mind.

My assignment was to cover the police beat, to cover how Sun.Star SuperBalita, the Cebuano edition of Sun.Star Davao, maintains on its tabloid format.
It was really fun talking to duty desk officers and both respondents and complainants especially the complaints bring a rare twist, -- eyed for shocking headline.

Every day is an exciting day, with a different place to go, different people to meet, and unexpected things to do, aside from the numerous press conferences I made to attend.

It was fun to be informed firsthand about anything that happened in the city, especially those in the police blotter, developing stories, and more.

I've done things I never did in my entire life -- went to a morgue and challenging myself to be brave enough to look at a corpse.
I also witnessed shooting incidents, bloodied body still lying on the road, suicide and stabbing incidents and more.
But the most challenging and somewhat traumatic was the Catalunan Peque\xf1o massacre that just happened few months ago.
I went to the crime scene and saw four bodies inside the house.
Blood was all over the living room and three bed rooms.
It was really scary, and I haven't ate any that day.
I could even imagine water as blood.

The house smelled like rust.
That night, I couldn't sleep.
The human blood looks like the blood of the pig.
I used to eat "dinuguan," but after that, I don't think I can ever do it again.
It also opened my eyes that writing is fun, and this work is not boring bisan og binisaya ang pagsuwat.
It makes you smarter each day, because writing a story is not that easy, you must write with credibility as you attempt to make readers interested on what you write.
The general beat: Where the real challenge is..., The general beat: Where the real challenge is...Ivy C.
Tejano, EVERY day is a fresh start!
With no specific beat to cover, everyday can be fun, exciting and interesting, or it can be tedious or exhausting, too.
It depends on the situation.

Being a general beat reporter requires versatility and patience.
Every day will start with a new story, and I guess that is the real challenge.
It's not only getting the story and writing it in completely different ways.
You have to adapt and understand what you have got from the field may it be environmental issues, disaster, human interest, agricultural, politics, crime and social welfare, or any other significant activities, among others.

Overall, it is a fulfilling job after all.
Not only that I have the opportunity to meet different people from all walks of life, but I was able to inform, to educate, to motivate and entertain people through the news stories and at the same time learn from them.
The business and economy, not a piece of cake, The business and economy, not a piece of cakeAce June Rell S.
Perez, IT IS getting oneself out of the desk and creating something sensible that makes reporter's work interesting.
If there is something I realized most as a print reporter, it is figuring out that the world is filled with stories and that there is no reason of running out.
Speaking of my "still-you-have-a-long-way-to-go" kind of experience as a business reporter, I am indeed in the initial construction stage of my development infrastructure project I am investing to myself.
I'm still struggling and will continue to struggle to perfectly able to strike an informed conversation with experts belonging to a vast number of fields -- from central bankers to corporate executives, government officials, investors, stock brokers, economists, mutual fund managers, restaurant owners and real-estate tycoons, until no more.
Covering the business beat, I've met and have meaningful conversations with people from diverse backgrounds.
In the process of writing and framing the story, interpreting and translating highly-technical information, figures and data to layman's term is indeed the most challenging part in covering the business beat.
We are tasked and duty-bound to let the general readers understand how the economy is doing and how business works the simplest way without taking from them the critical thinking they should develop while reading the story.
Of course, like any kind of job, business reporting is no piece of cake considering the insistence and pursuit of meticulous accuracy.
So far, one of the most challenging topics I get to encounter covering my beat are information and communication technology, banking and financing and the power energy issues.
 
Another thing I learned while covering a story, well not just limited to the "work" itself but even in life as a whole, is do not be afraid of asking questions, feed the curiosity in you because through that you will get to know a plethora of things, .
But the best part of covering the "business beat" is you get to expose more on developments and innovations around your community.

Receiving calls, chats and text messages from your sources and some readers saying that you did a great job are also just some of the best feelings there is in my line of work.
Still on top at 20, Still on top at 20Christine Joice C.
Cudis, IN THIS age of advanced technology, everyone seems to have relied on gadgets in almost everything that a person does.
But the existence of the newspaper industry must not be overlooked as it proves that people are still patronizing this news medium.
Different challenges stormed out throughout the years but it has not threatened, it just strengthened the publishing business.
Clearly, it has become the most powerful tool to express ideas and information.
It is a part and parcel of modern life.
It is playing its vital role by providing information and creating awareness among the people.
With this importance that a newspaper portrays in a society, Sun.Star Davao, for 20 years now, is blessed to be hailed as the number one in readership as proven by the latest survey conducted by the city's premier university.
In the June 2015 study conducted by the Ateneo de Davao University Social Research Training and Development Office, Sun.Star has retained its stature as the most preferred community paper being read by Dabawenyos, along with its Visayan tabloid, Sun.Star SuperBalita.
Based on survey results, SuperBalita registered 46% in readership, 26% for the English newspaper SunStar Davao.
With a combined readership of 72.10%, this leaves its closest competitors, the Mindanao Times and Mindanao Daily Mirror to only 13.80% each, and Edge Davao with .28%.
Like its Cebu counterpart which has acquired 80% rating in readership, giving only its competitors Freeman and Cebu Daily News only 10% each.
This just shows that the affiliates are consistent with the SunStar brand of readership excellence.
Based on the same survey, Sun.Star dominates readership all over the city, from first to third district.

It cuts across all ages with strongest readership being among the age of the decision makers.
Sun.Star also topped all income brackets, serving every niche.
It will always be a work-in-progress for Sun.Star.
In the following years to come, its management vowed to remain true to its vision, to serve without bias and manipulation.
A proud Dabawenyo in corporate world, A proud Dabawenyo in corporate worldAce June Rell S.
Perez, IN MAKING Davao City as one of the safest city in the global map, IBM Philippines plays a significant role in making it happen.
And the one running this multinational corporation, one of the largest in the world with a remarkable track record of driving innovation and business results, is a proud Dabawenyo.
His name is Luisito "Luis" Pineda, the 15th president and country general manager of IBM Philippines.
"I am proud of being a Dabawenyo, and Davao is one of the cities in the world where you feel safe and secured.
Of course big part of this is its partnership with IBM in creating an Intelligent Operations Center  Public Safety and Security Command Center  for the city to bolster its bid to become a 'smarter city,'" Pineda said, adding that the city is the first city in the world to have an IOC.
As the man who will take the role and assume responsibility for all of IBM's operations in the Philippines, he earned such position through unparalled hard work and dedication for 23 years in the company.

Pineda takes charge in the company's sales and distribution, systems and technology, software and services units, and fully-owned subsidiaries offering global delivery including IBM Solutions Delivery and IBM Business Services.
"With my best, I look forward to continuing to build IBM's capability in the Philippines.
I want to continue the legacy of leadership built over the last 77 years in providing value for our clients, our communities and the country through innovation that matters," he said.
He joined IBM's Silicon Valley Lab in 1991 and within three months, he invented a Computer Aided Software Engineering product, which resulted in a 10-fold improvement in productivity for developers.
He also helped several successful businesses in IBM and co-founded one of the first services businesses to utilize offshore capabilities in delivering complex Enterprise Solutions to clients worldwide.
He initiated the world's first wireless banking solution, utilizing Wireless Application Protocol  at Svenska Handelsbanken, created offshore delivery centers in Belarus, Jordan, China, India, Latvia, and Russia, and started the first Software Group Technical Support Center in the Philippines.
He also started the first Software Group Technical Support Center in the Philippines, supporting customers in North America.
Prior to his appointment as CGM, he was a Vice President, Client Support and Success, Industry Cloud Solutions, IBM Software Group.
Davao, for him is his hometown since he was born and raised in the city before they immigrated to Seattle, Washington, USA.
He studied elementary at the Ateneo de Davao, before his family migrated to the US.
He earned his Bachelor of Science in Computer Science at the University of Washington.
"If given the chance to speak before a crowd of graduating elementary and high school students in my alma mater, I would love to take the opportunity to give inspiration to the young generation and make them believe that dreams could be real only if you do something to make it happen," he said.

Popularizing organic cuisine, urban farming, Popularizing organic cuisine, urban farmingChristine Joice C.
Cudis, IF FLATTENING a mountain is not impossible these days, so is making an organic farm in a city like Davao.

Wynward Valley Organic Vegetable Garden, a farm which started as a hobby of plant pathologist, Dr.
Rodelio "Milo" Dalisay is also open for the public to enjoy delicious organic recipes.
Dalisay earned his doctorate in the University of Kentucky.
To make ends meet, he had several jobs; he teaches Plant Biochemistry in the graduate school and works as a chef in a Japanese restaurant for at least 11 years.
His knowledge in plants and experience in the kitchen added to his botanical science background when he returned to Davao in 2006 to inherit his grandfather's lot which was then an abandoned rest house at Regina Dalisay Compound, Bajada Street.
For the place to be restored, he needed quite an amount of money which at the moment he has none of.
This led him to start off a small organic vegetable garden in the corner of his estate.

Incidentally, Davao market in 2013 showed huge interest in organic vegetables, so the demand for expansion is high.
Until the whole inherited land was converted to an urban farm.
Today, Wynward Valley Organic Vegetable Garden is a fully operational and highly frequented restaurant and urban farm, where diners have a view of the very garden from which grows the food they eat.
His farm-cum bistro also houses plants which are not commonly grown in a tropical country like ours.
It grows: kale, passion fruit, sage, dill, tarragon, thyme, cilantro, basil, peppermint, spearmint.
Right now, fish ponds that will store in Tilapias will be added to his organic garden.
Aquaponics, a type of aquaculture system wherein the waste produced by farmed fish will supply nutrients for plants grown hydroponically, which in turn will purify the water will be used.
Dalisay being a scientist and a teacher that he is knows he will not settle for establishing the bistro as his end-goal.
He continues his advocacy to show organic farming as highly beneficial and profitable.
His new project is to put up another organic farm in the Marilog district which will benefit the residing elementary and high school students who are staying at Balay Pasilungan.

It is kind of a transient house for the children to stay so they would not have to trek five to seven kilometers from their houses going to the school.
Dalisay aims to educate the children so they could have at least something to eat whilst they stay at the Balay Pasilungan.
At the same time, he teaches them and the parents how to plant properly so they could earn from it as well.
With the help of Seeds of Dignity, Rotary Club of Pag-asa, Biosand Filter, Barangay officers of Datu Salumay, and the Marilog school of Agriculture, there will be another organic farm that will rise in the city.
Kahayag: Lighting up the way to sustainable agri, Kahayag: Lighting up the way to sustainable agri
DAVAO.
Daycare kids lead the way as they excitedly tour the farm with the owner, Mikhal Evasco.
Karina V.
Canedo, KAHAYAG Farms is Davao based organic farm but not only on the commonly labeled organic that usually pertained to plants but also to their livestock and poultry.
Mikhal A.
Evasco, the resident farmer at Kahayag Farms, runs the three-hectare farm with the plants, herbs, chicken, pigs, wild pigs, rabbit, sheep and goat, and believe it or not they are not tainted with anything artificial or synthetic.
They all consume organic food and only take organic medicine.
Kahayag Farms started to be all organic in the year 2011 and it's been since that they also conducted transition period from commercial breed piglets into organic ones.

"The transition is based on the Philippine national standard nag-start 2011 kadtong sa organic for one year wala na me naggamit ug synthetic based on farm materials such as chemicals." 
They also raise and breed wild pigs for meat and lechon sold at their all organic restaurant called Minkah's kitchen where they serve organic food down to the meat up to the spices and herbs used.
Evasco said the technologies that they used came from the practices in Maribojoc, Bohol, which inspired him to do organic farming.

He developed the other technologies himself in the within the two years of their operation as an organic farm.
"For two years, we only did research and development sa farm, thus we only had limited production because we wanted that once we go full-scale, we should be prepared," Evasco said.
Evasco said that his research was done through a lot of farm tours in different places with good practices he also cited the help of the advantage of Internet.
"We did benchmarking at Maribojoc, a farm in Bohol.
It's not copy paste but it's there where the formulation were given.
 Along the way we have developed it and right now we really achieved it, it's competitive and at par with the quality that we saw there.
 Relatively, we succeeded in our trial," Evasco said.

Evasco said that they started establishing their livestock and after a few months their poultry.
"They have the same food, it's only the management and handling transition especially that time we still did not have a sow, so we were dependent on the piglets outside.
Once the source is outside, you need a month to process the pig from commercial grade to organic.
Now we do not depend on outside farms because we already have 11 sows existing, and three sows of wild pigs," he said.
Among the things unique in Kahayag Farms is their breeding of wild pigs.

Evasco said that wild pigs are tastier and have less fat compared to domesticated ones.
The disadvantage is that wild pigs take longer to grow.
"Instead of 80 kilos within four months, it would take eight to ten months before they would weigh 80 kilos.
We also have fattening pigs for our meat.
What we do for the wild pigs, we use it for lechon so that it will not increase the production cost.
Native wild pigs are preferred in the market as there are market for the native wild, but as far as I know we are the only one who sell and breed wild pigs," Evasco said.
 
"We plan to expand for another 50 heads for the sow and then another 500 heads for the breeder and in the poultry 500 heads and for fattening also 500 heads," Evasco added.

He said that since their farm is sustainable, profit is assured.
Last year, their farm netted half a million.
As of this time, they target P700,000.
They are targeting a P1-million profit next year.
"Organic farming is labor intensive.
But since our cost for inputs like fertilizer and feeds is low, it is still balanced.
We still get big profit from it.
The labor cost is well compensated," Evasco said.

The farm is labor intensive because the farmers prepare for everything, the feeds from organic sources, and the concoctions that are fed to the animals.

Another good feature of the Kahayag farms is that they do not believe in trade secrets and share their learning and technology to farmers who are interested to know about.
Within their farm you can find training halls and dormitories where the farmers who do their farm tour and training can actually stay.
A one-day learning tour costs P1,300 head, three days P4,800, and five days  P8,400 inclusive of meals and accommodation.

"On the one day per commodity it would depend on the interest of the farmer and the would-be farmer.
On the three days, it's not the introductory anymore, but there are also integration of the commodities, the five days, all the commodities were offered.
We offer inputs on farm livestock, poultry, crop production, gardening, vermiculture, concoctions, fertilizer, production and feed formulation.
Kana wala man mi trade secrets sa farm ginatudlo jud namo tanan ," he said.

Evasco also said they also offer buyback program to those whom they have trained.
They have also conduct monitoring and consultation to the farmers who availed the training.
Most of those who availed the buyback program are those who are still struggling to find their markets.
"It's part of our commitment to those who taught to us, aside from open consultation and mentoring anytime, one of the highlights of the services that we offer is once we are assured that the products of other trained farmers are fully organic, we buy it to encourage farmer to continue organic agriculture.
We get the products straight from their farm, buying them at prevailing rates," Evasco said.
Currently, they have tied up with buyback programs with all other organic farmers in Mindanao.
Those who availed were mostly from people's organizations including individual farmers at Agusan, Sta-Josefa , Sigaboy , and Antipas for the coco sugar.
Apart from that they have also tapped their own farm worker s in their dispersal program where they give piglets to their farmers workers in the community.

"Not only that they are simply farm workers because we taught them all the kinds of technology used in the farm to replicate it in their houses.
We encourage them so that is why we the dispersal program to the sow pigs and poultry.
These are not freely given, if you would like to buy it would be cash to cash.
The deductions will be per harvest," Evasco said.

The workers know the organic farm technologies themselves and they themselves are part of the training of visitors.
Kahayag is planning on expanding its work force soon once they increase the number of heads of their livestock.
"Additional jobs na pud sa community," Evasco said.
Aside from that, they also resorted to contract farming among their neighbors in the community.
"It's the same for the workers we give them options between livestock or contract growing of corn, soybeans because that is essential to our feeds.
It is the same concept actually in the chicken or pigs but instead of feeds, we provide them fertilizer and they would sell it to us and we buy it at a premium price, instead of selling it to the local market we are the ones who pick them up at market price," Evasco said.
He added that only molasses, rice bran  and fish are not sourced from their farms.

"It is not possible for us to produce molasses.
Hopefully we can build a fish pond, and acquire a rice field for the rice bran, but sustainability wise, it can all be provided here," Evasco said.
He said the products that they buy back goes to their restaurant along Maa Road beside S&R, the Minkah's Kitchen and also the farm for visitors.
He added that the yield of their farm primarily goes to their restaurant and they only sell the surplus of what they need.

For Minkah's Kitchen, which they have formally operated since last December the average meat consumption is two heads of fattening pigs per week.
Evasco said they have not experienced shortage because they have not yet fully opened for the public.
They also do catering, from which they source the ingredients from the farm and the contract farms.
Evasco said they are certified under the Participatory Guarantee System, a certifying body for organic farms and organic food.

He said that based on law farmers cannot claim that they produce organic products without a supporting document from a body or organization.
"Our plan is within the end of the year we could get a third party certification.
This certification means you can supply your organic goods to the whole Philippines," Evasco said.

Evasco added that since they are planning to expand the number and the poultry, they are set to supply meat in mall groceries, once they boost their production.
Coffee for Peace is coffee for peace, Coffee for Peace is coffee for peaceRhealyn C.
Pojas, A DELICIOUS sip and more, this is what the Coffee for Peace offers by serving coffee to people while helping the people behind the coffee production.

Coffee for Peace which is situated at G/F Fredric Building, MacArthur Highway, Matina in Davao City offers people more than just a cup of coffee either served hot or cold as it has become a tool to help farmers in the highlands to generate profit through using their own land for coffee production.
A glimpse of the history of Coffee for Peace will tell you that the business started as an income generating project for the Peace Builders Community Inc.
, a non-government organization that advocates peace particularly in Mindanao.
"Coffee for Peace does not want to branch out.
We don't want to be like the other coffee shops in the Philippines.
Coffee for peace showcases the coffee of the farmers," said Coffee for Peace roasting and logistics manager Daniel Byron Pantoja in an interview with Sun.Star Davao explaining further that while they do not want to branch out, they provide coffee to other entrepreneurs and export some coffees abroad.
"So our dream is to supply coffees to other entrepreneurs because the more we could supply and grow that way the more we could buy coffee from farmers," Pantoja explained.
Pantoja narrated that it was on 2006 when his family came here in the Philippines and started the Peace Builders Community Inc.
During that time, his parents would go to conflict area and every time they sit down they would drink coffee.
The birth or idea of coffee for peace as an income generating project for the organization began from casual sips of coffee during those travels or visitation in the conflicted areas in Mindanao.
Though the CFP started in 2006, the actual incorporation began in 2008.
In the beginning, their coffees came from Sulu where they made contacts through the peace network.
The source of their coffee first came from there however the contact was lost and eventually the deal died out.
As time went on, they found another source and that was when they came across a certain Pastor in General Santos City named Fred who is also into coffee growing and who liked the vision of CFP and their advocacies.
CFP then supported PBCI, which worked in the communities especially among the farmers and 25 percent of the profit was forwarded to the said organization.

The good thing about the business is that the profit they earned will be injected back to the business to help the farmers.

"We want to do whatever we can, that will help them the most even if re-investing all of the project back to buying or back into funding our harvest, we don't use the process to scale up," Pantoja explained.

"It's about moving the bean and getting the farmers to make better quality coffee all the time," Pantoja uttered referring to the main goal of CFP.
Why Coffee?
When asked why they had chosen coffee over any other products, Pantoja explained that it is because coffee crosses all economic, cultural, and age boundary.
He also said that based on his research, he found that coffee is the second largest traded commodity in the world which is second only to oil.
Also, Asia used to be a tea-drinking country but is now becoming coffee-drinking country, Pantoja said, adding that more people want coffee.
Coffee is also a means to connect people from all walks of life.
People from the highland, who are producing the coffee beans, will have a place to connect with people from the lowland over a cup of coffee.

More Bitter
Though the help extended by CFP to the farmers is contributing not just on the economic aspect but as well as of the cultural aspect among others, they also faced certain problems in the operation.
 
"The main challenges in the industry are scaling up and quality control," Pantoja said.
Scaling up their production had become a problem, Pantoja explained, since another company could just buy the land that the farmers owned and then hire all the farmers to work for them which results into the farmers becoming employees in their own land.
"But the CFP doesn't want that to happen because what we want is that the farmers will do it  for their own land," Pantoja said.
Aside from that, the other challenges they are facing is the quality control, which means getting the farmers to follow certain processes in drying their coffee beans and also man power.
Pantoja also expressed that they also need to guarantee the people through their show and tell approach that they can really earn out of growing coffee trees.
The farmers might think that planting coffee trees is pointless if they do not have a buyer.
"If they don't see it, they won't do it," Pantoja said adding that the farmers needed to see that they will earn an income from it.
Also in an article posted in peacebuilders.org which is written by Jonathan Cranston, Coffee for Peace Barista Catherine Moreno Olitao expressed the common things experienced by the farmers where she explained that there are businessmen who prey on farmers and dictate very low prices for their produce and she had also stated the fact that middle class Filipinos prefer the imported coffees over the locally produce coffees.
A Reason to Be Excited
Against all odds, the CFP together with their farmer partners continue to work for their dream of producing good quality coffee.
Pantoja expressed that they are excited over a new plan which they had come up for the business.
He said that they are trying to buy a land and make a memorandum of agreement.
Now they are going to help the farmers in the area of management, research, and development of the coffee.
If before, CFP is only touching the quality control, now they are more hands on, Pantoja said.
Through this new plan, they are going to make clear partnership with the farmers and co-manage the facility.
What they are going to earn from the operation will be injected back to the business to help the farmers more.
"So what are we going to focus on is train the farmers to make better process control and better product knowledge, focus effort, ecological processing method, and waste management," Pantoja explained.

Pantoja also remarked that one should be involved with the community so that one can find a way that is sustainable economically, socially, and culturally.
Hot Chili rebuilds, Hot Chili rebuildsKarlo Paolo R.
Pates, IT'S been three years since Super Typhoon Pablo  that devastated the provinces of Davao Oriental and Compostela Valley in Davao Region which primarily affected the agriculture sector.
Typhoon Pablo, the strongest until typhoon Yolanda, left thousands of people dead and injured and their houses flattened.
Worst, the coconut plantations and farmlands were flattened as well.
While the people of Davao Oriental at first were in the doldrums for having lost their livelihood, now they are slowly rising back with the introduction of hot chili processing.
Davao Oriental has been known among those familiar with the town for their "dumang" or powdered siling labuyo, but these were produced in backyard operations, the products sold in shoddily tagged "lapad" bottles.
It was through the initiative of Department of Trade and Industry  11 and it's Hot Chili or Hot Pablo that changed the lives of the local communities in Boston, Bagangam, and Cateel in the aftermath of Typhoon Pablo.
DTI's Hot Chili Project encouraged the farmers to plant, process, and market of hot chili and its by-products.
The project is a collaborative effort of the provincial government of Davao Oriental led by Gov.
Corazon Malanyaon, local government units , Department of Agriculture and Department of Science and Technology .

El Tigre Chili Products, which started its operation on March 2013, three months after the devastation of Typhoon Pablo, was one of the recipients of the DTI's initiated assistance project.

Aside from the El Tigre Chili Products, other beneficiaries of the project in the province were Dory Dumang Products, Edelia's Dumang Products, Ayana's Siling Kinamayo, and Subangon Dumang Makers.
MAMA Trees Farmers Association which started the El Tigre Chili Products presently have 225 workers who were all victims of Typhoon Pabo.
Luis C.
Bueno, Jr., president/owner of El Tigre Chili Products, in an interview with Sun.Star Davao during the Mindanao Trade Expo Foundation, Inc.
held last Aug.
13 to 20 at the Abreeza Ayala Mall, said that they started this initiative to provide a source of income for fellow kababayans who were affected by Typhoo Pablo.
"Sa hirap ng buhay pagkatapos kaming bagyohin, ito ang nakita naming solusyon upang malayo ang mga residente sa paggawa ng krimen.
At para na rin mabigyan sila ng trabaho," Bueno said.
Beuno said that most of our farmers were victims of the Typhoon while some are Indigenous Peoples .

"Sa simula konti pa lang kami but later on marami nang sumali sa aming grupo," Bueno said.
El Tigre Chili Products has been partnering with DA-Agribusiness and Marketing Assistance Division  for the promotion of their sili products.

Local chili producers are not only producing chili powder but also selling other by-products chili extract and chili paste, and are now producing other processed agricultural products as well like banana chips, danggit, turmeric and guyabano products, suka tuba, mango puree, and salabat.
"Okay naman ang market as of now.
Marami na kaming potential buyers pero kulang pa rin ang naiproproduce namin na mga supplies.
Limited muna ito sa aming mga direct buyers and local communities dito sa Oriental.
Bueno said that their 20 hectares hot chili plantation is not sufficient to meet the demands of the market.
They are currently supplying dried chili to Kablon Farms in Tupi, South Cotabato, for their spiced chocolate bars which are being exported in Malaysia.
Just this month, samples of 300 kgs of the dried chili varieties were sent to Australia for market test.
If it comes back positive, then they have a potential exporter in the future.
Farmers in the Davao Oriental get to harvest chili varieties once a week which in turn are bought by the sellers.
Farmers sell the fresh chilis at P50/kl.

El Tigre Chili Products are also processing the registration of their business under the Food and Drugs Administration  which would allow the micro small medium enterprises MSMEs) like them to penetrate the bigger market.
But Bueno also bared that the construction of a processing plant in Davao Oriental is underway.
"Akala namin kasi harvest at benta lang pero kelangan pala na may magandang handling din sa mga products," Bueno said.
"We were also taught how to dry and grind chili varieties upang hindi ito masira."
Mary Ann Balilaon, secretary of El Tigre Chili Products, also shared that their products have health benefits.
"Marami ito benefits to high blood and hyperacidity," Balilaon said.
   
Bueno said that the farmers have benefitted a lot in terms of their earning from the chili plantation ever since their business has started.
Prices of their products are the following; Chili powder , chili extract , chili paste , banana chips , bukayo , danggit , suka tuba , Turmeric , salabat , and Guyabano .
El Tigre Farms is located at Barangay Malibago in Cateel, Davao Oriental.

El Tigre Chili Products is set to participate in the Agrilink 2015 set October 15 to 17 to be held at the World Trade Center in Metro Manila.
"Sumasali talaga kami sa mga expo para mas makilala pa nila ang mga products namin," Bueno said.

Due to the favorable weather conditions in the Davao Oriental, local farmers are also planting falcata trees.
Although they would have to wait seven to 10 years before it can be sold in the market, still, this can be considered as an investment.
"Stable ang China and dito sa ating ang Butuan City for this industry," Bueno said.
Davoc: The organic chicken brand, Davoc: The organic chicken brandAce June Rell S.
Perez, ENVISIONING a sustainable market with organic products, Davao Organic Chicken or commonly known as Davoc leads the way in organic living.
Davoc is a naturally-grown chicken developed after two years of genetic research conducted by Dr.
Ernesto Gonzales, owner of Gonzales Nature Farm and a Gawad Saka 2014 awardee of the Department of Agriculture in Davao region.
"I envision that someday the market will be dominated with organic chicken for a sustainable living," he said.
Sustainable Nature Farming System, this is the Davocs core values applied in its way of farming with a holistic approach.
Located in Barangay Eden, Toril, Davoc chickens are raised free-range with no chemicals and antibiotics intakes within a three-hectare farm.
Management, nutrition, breed and biosecurity, these are the essentials of poultry industry that have been given focus by Davoc.
"Davoc is more than just a chicken supplier.
We do not just sell the chicken but we also introduce the system of how to raise naturally-grown chicken for sustainability purposes, a through this we create an impact to the society,201d Gonzales said on how to raise chicken the Davoc way.
Davoc partners with the Department of Agriculture through Agriculture Training Institute and non-government organizations  to conduct a two-day hands-on seminar and training on 201cSustainable Nature Farming System201d focusing on how to raise Davoc chicken to small farmers almost every month.
201cOne of the farm2019s advocacies is livelihood to small farmers.
We encourage the customers not just   buy Davoc chicken but also be trained in Davoc farm because we will introduce to them the sustainable way of raising chicken as well,201d he said urging the small farmers to go  natural 201cwe envision to see small farmers supplying food to consumers making the food supply chain with natural and healthy food.
It2019s what we call 201cFarm to table201d process,201d he added.
Davao takes pride in supplying hybrid-native chicken which has fast-growth characteristics.
201cDavoc looks exactly as a native chicken but it is more tender and tastier above all it grows faster.
For example, it takes six months  for a native  chicken to gain one kilo compared  to Davoc which only takes three months for it to weigh a kilo,201d he said.
With an average production of 700 chickens a month, Davoc with its distributor Century House of Spice supplies a number of hotel, supermarkets, livelihood and restaurant including Toryanos chicken house.
At present Davoc has 2,000 organic chicken breeders housed in over eight satellite farms in Toril, Calinan, Tagum, Compostela Valley, General Santos, Butuan, among others.

Meanwhile, Green Bounty, a marketing arm of the Gonzalez Nature Farm located in Barangay Eden, Toril, sells farm fresh, 100 percent naturally-grown vegetables as a way of introducing healthy living.
The organic farm sells only quality fresh garden salads, like romaine, green and purple leafy lettuces, salad tomatoes, cherry tomatoes, arugula, cucumber, and native pechay.
It also sells herbs of different kinds like arugula, sweet basil, Thai basil, oregano, tarragon, rosemary, dill, silantro, peppermint, and stevia.
All of the Green Bounty's products came from its farm, which strictly implements good agricultural practices  and sustainable nature farming system, and planted and grown by its small farmers partners.
"Our vegetables are distributed through Century House of Spice to Robinson's groceries and a number of hotels and restaurants like Marco Polo Hotel," said Luzviminda Gonzalez, Green Bounty owner and wife of Ernesto Gonzales.
Introducing the gift economy, Introducing the gift economyRuji Peter S.
Abat, WHILE agriculture ventures are mostly profit-oriented, a group in Davao City has been giving out vegetables for free while being bent on teaching children and adults alike on the methods of organic farming in a bid to promote backyard farming which could in turn create a sustainable food and natural medicine source for every household.
The group Organic Minds founded by Alter Picar and Freeda Lyf  organized the Sharing Garden project in 2012 to train people on the fundamentals of organic farming and gardening while at the same time donating the produce of their little backyard farm in Country Homes, Cabantian.
201cAng vision gyud sa Sharing Garden kay mag-establish ug community gardens ug para magraise ug awareness sa mga gardeners ug volunteers nga maghuna-huna sa food security ug sustainable nga environment ,201d Picar told Sun.Star Davao.
He also said that Sharing Garden, as the name suggests, aims to promote gift economy where the community can have access to free and organic food while also showing a strong stance against an otherwise capitalistic way of living where people have to pay for virtually everything they eat.
Lyf likened what they are doing to community building.
201cSince we want to build a community that could help others and we also want to establish a seed bank so that we could donate organic seeds to the community as counter against GMOs,201d he said.
For three years now, around 100 children and adults have visited Organic Minds2019 little garden to learn and do volunteer work.
Most of the visitors are the neighborhood kids but Picar said there were also foreign indie bands and non-government organizations who assisted them and at the same time learned from them.
Visitors are then shown instructional videos during film viewings and they also provided with reading materials.
Later on, the visitors will then conduct hands on work as they assist Organic Minds in cultivating crops in their garden.
"We teach the basics of organic farming like how to produce organic fertilizers, natural pesticides and fungicides.
We also teach them transplanting and how to make seeds sprout," Picar said.
Organic Minds is currently cultivating okra, eggplant, tomatoes, long beans, pechay, kang-kong and some culinary herbs which includes oregano, basil, peppermint, rosemary and turmeric which they claimed could also be used as alternative medicine.
But Lyf clarified that their crops are not 100 percent organic just organically grown 2013 meaning free from harmful pesticides, fungicides and other chemicals.
As expected, their neighbors find it odd that they are giving away vegetables and herbs for free.
"They don't get why we are a promoting a sharing or gift economy and at times they are hesitant to get some free vegetables.
But we try to let them understand that it is really free," Picar said.
But while the Sharing Gardens project is community-driven, Organic Minds refused to coordinate with the barangay officials in the area as Picar said they don't want to be involved in any politicking schemes of the local officials there.
"There was this one time when one of the barangay officials here visited our neighbor who also had the same project as ours.
That official took a picture of the garden and claimed that it was one of the initiatives of the barangay when that official didn't actually give any support to that garden.
Since then we didn't connect with them," Picar said.
Lyf, on the other hand, said that they are often misunderstood and it seems it has already been ingrained in the minds of the residents there that almost everything should be bought.
"It's that false sense of ownership and entitlement.
That is why some of the neighbors are still hesitant.
But for us, it is basically for sharing and as long as we have the time and manpower to maintain our crops, we will give them out for free whenever we have harvests," Lyf said.
Elaborating Lyf's concern on manpower, Picar said he hopes to have more volunteers who are willing to commit their time and effort citing that some of the volunteers just come and go.
Picar, however, remains optimistic especially that more children are getting involved in the Sharing Garden project saying, "At times, the children are the ones knocking on our doors and asking us if there are any activities in store for them.
We are pleased that kids, who are more active than the adults, have shown their intent to pursue our project."
Organic Minds is now eyeing another area within Country Homes where they could expand their organic farming so that they could provide a more healthy food choice for the residents in their area as well as mentor children and adults.
He added that a bigger land area would be the best way for them to develop their Sharing Garden project yet his only concern is that they don't have enough funds and patience to procure land and they don't want to be tangled in the bureaucracy that comes with it.

Until then, Organic Minds will continue to pursue their advocacy of promoting backyard farming and building a community where gift economy thrives.
"We envision that our sharing gardens would be replicated and more people could share our realization that we can't solely rely on the markets and pharmacies since we can actually grow our own food and medicine in our backyards," Picar said.
The real deal, The real deal
REAL ZEAL.
As sales director for Visayas and Mindanao of Ayala Land Sales Inc., Allan Ong Jr.
finds a sense of fulfillment in helping people achieve their dreams in the real estate industry.
Of course, he2019s also thrilled to be assigned in what he calls 201cthe beautiful island of Cebu.201d
Deneb R.
Batucan, Allan Ong Jr.
scales new heights in real estate
, DAPPER and refined, Allan Ong Jr.
brings an aura of confidence as he approaches the room.
Standing tall, his smile is warm and inviting, never faltering.
He greets his office with an optimistic air 2014he2019s definitely happy to be where he is.
For Allan, going to work is no tedious job at all since he2019s exposed to a field he is most passionate about 2014 sales.
201cI like meeting new people and it2019s a lucrative industry,201d he shared.
201cI2019m working, but it doesn2019t feel like work!201d
More about this story in Sun.Star Weekend's August 30, 2015 issue.
Click here to read more.

Rebirth of Bahay Bata under Tulay Foundation, Rebirth of Bahay Bata under Tulay FoundationIan Ocampo Flora, A BEACON of hope now shines for street children in Pampanga as Angeles Bahay Bata Center is now reborn under the management of Father Rocky Evangelista's Tuloy Foundation, Inc.
The facility will soon open its doors not just to street children, as according to Fr.
Evangelista, the facility is open to any youth needing support.
The Angeles Bahay Bata Center is an institution in Central Luzon that seeks to uplift the welfare of "street children".

This, as the facility was again presented under new management on Monday.
The event was attended by Clark Development Corporation president Arthur P.
Tugade, Carmen McTavish as representative for Rotary Club of Clark Centennial and Mayor Edgardo Pamintuan among others.
Until recently, the Bahay Bata Center was managed by the Rotary Club of Clark Centennial members.
However, according to the deed of donation, the organization could no longer manage it, and thus transferred the responsibility, management and operation to Tuloy Foundation.
It should be noted that Rotary has patterned its formula of taking care of street children on Tuloy Foundation2019s comprehensive rehabilitation program for street children.
Tuloy Foundation, Inc.
is a non-stock, non-profit corporation based in Muntinlupa City and started by Father Evangelista in 1993.
It is a comprehensive rehabilitation program for street children in Manila that has achieved outstanding success and worldwide recognition since its inauguration.

The Tuloy Project is designed to help poor and abandoned children to regain self worth and dignity, giving them a chance for a better life; acquire Christian values and habits for a decent, humane and Christian life; and develop the skills and training for self-reliance and integration into society.
Mayor Pamintuan has transferred the management of the Bahay Bata Center to Tuloy Foundation under a usufruct agreement.
 The lot, where the center is located, was donated to the local government in November 16, 2000 by Timog Silangan Development Corporation.
Mayor Pamintuan is very optimistic that the project will be a further success under Fr.
Evangelista.
Set in its own grounds, the center has a three-storey building and has four spacious dormitories that can house 60 children.
However, Fr.
Evangelista said that they need the support of the private and business sectors in the city to fully operate the facility to its full capacity.

Fr.
Evangelista notes that they have tapped help of Clark Development Corporation and locators like Luen Thai for their support.
 
Taking the lead was Laus Group of Companies  chairman Levy P.
Laus, who initiated the donation of one Haima FStar for the use of the foundation and its other logistical requirements.
 
The donation was formally presented by Maria Theresa Laus to Fr.
Evangelista.
Mrs.
Laus said that they are in full support of the Salesian initiatives in Pampanga adding that they hope to work on common initiatives through LGC's corporate social responsibility programs.

Prominent Architect Andy Gulapa is the lead architect for the future projects of the foundation in Pampanga.
 
Gulapa has volunteered his services to the foundation after knowing of its worthy advocacies.
 He said that helping the foundation will further bring much needed Christian charity where it is most needed.
"I believe in the project of Fr.
Evangelista and I have been in contact with other people to help the foundation.
 The more children we could help, the better," Gulapa, a well known supporter of Christian advocacy programs in Candaba and Angeles City, said.
Fr.
Evangelista was quick to note that the "Tuloy experience" impresses that fact that street children are not treated as marginalized and different.

"In fact they are treated as family.
 It is our objective to give them the needed well-rounded formation and skills so that they can be able to fully care for themselves," Fr.
Evangelista said.
This claim is not surprising as Tuloy Foundation's formula emphasizes Christian values, discipline, vocational skills and training for future productive employment.

Following a six-phase program, the street children are gradually and systematically rehabilitated.
Through apprenticeship and on the job training the children are exposed to the working world to prepare them for future employment.
For comments, suggestions, violent reactions, invites, hate-mails, indignant rebuttals and what-have-you email the author at ianocampoflora@yahoo.com or call 0920-964-9664.
Pilgrim's note, Pilgrim's notePILGRIM is defined as someone who travels to a holy place to search for the meaning of life and faith.
In our context, we are indeed pilgrims in our way to soul searching.
Last August 28-31, we went to Lucban Quezon, a three-hour drive away from Metro Manila to visit our friend Jervie de Guzman, a former seminarian and now a successful businessman.
Also, it is a time for us to relax and reflect from very tiring months.
As a school instructor, we live in an arena wherein we train our students to be competent individuals and make them nation builders by sharpening their minds, giving them weapon to combat the challenges in life.
Literally, it is a battle between ignorance and knowledge.
As we go along in our journey to Lucban, we reflect on the things that we met.
Those things deepened our faith and changed our perceptions in life.
So here are the things that we reflect on our way to Lucban.
* Delayed flight
Before we leave Iloilo, we met one of the things that really irritated the travelers -- flight delay.
Hearing the announcement from a person in authority seemed like hearing a politician's promises.
Lots of passengers got irritated, while others curse the receptionist.
Some of us slept and watched the basketball game on TV.
Reflections:  Flight delays are not new to us and I think it is normal to get upset in that event.
Charles Swindoll reminded me of something that I carry every time there's an event that will trigger your negative reaction.
He said, "Life is 10% what happens to you and 90% how you react to it."
Really, we sometimes tend to forget who we are and what we are when those things happen.
We cannot control the things that will happen along the way; we cannot blame the receptionist that announced the flight delays and we cannot blame God if this thing happened to us.
Let us think rationally.
It really pays off if we rationalize because the more we blame, the more the situation becomes worse and others will look at us as uneducated.
Patience is really out of the context nowadays.
What really caught my attention is the old man who smiles at the receptionist not because of the receptionist's pretty face but because he understands that those things happened beyond their control and if all of us have that mindset, "what a wonderful world," just like what Louis Armstrong said in his song.
* Zigzag road
After a five-hour flight delay, we took a ride and went straight to Lucban.
We met a zigzag road that led us to Lucban.
It's a quite difficult road to drive especially for the new ones but for the expert, it's easy as ABC.
Reflections:  Zigzag road is similar to our lives -- full of obstacles or hurdles.
There are some changes in your plans and the more you encounter those obstacles, the more you become stronger to face the challenges in your life.
Life doesn't make sense if we can't face those obstacles.
You cannot call it life if you try to evade those hurdles that block your way.
Those hurdles measure your strength as a person and the more you face it, the more you become stronger than you think.
So the next time you see those zigzag roads, always keep in mind that "this too shall pass."
* Mt.
Banahaw
The first thing that comes into our mind upon entering Majayjay is the Mt.
Banahaw, a 7, 119ft above mean sea level that is considered the holy mountain and popular among the pilgrims and mountain climbers.
It really gives you an impression of the majestic creation of God.
The mountain gives you an impression that we are lucky to have these landforms because we are blessed by the gift of nature.
The mountain offers spiritual and serene ambiance, giving you time to reflect and meditate.
Reflections: Mountains are often associated by the word "problem" because upon seeing it, we sometimes tend to think that we cannot overcome it.
Let us think in a positive way -- that mountains in our life are a challenge that we must overcome.
It is conquering the Goliath that crosses our way.
Climbing the mountain implies hard work and learning new skill.
I still remember how the Iloilo, once known as the simple city, became one of the most livable cities in the Philippines because of its innovations and dynamic improvement in terms of business and facilities.
No doubt that the city administrators and the government of Iloilo City overcome the challenges that hinder their way to progress and now, they dubbed it as "tiger economy." Thanks to the leadership of Hon.
Jed Patrick Mabilog and Sen.
Franklin Drilon and also other city administrators who catapult the city from simple city to a progressive city.

* Kamay ni Hesus Shrine
One of our brothers, Jervie de Guzman, toured us in Kamay ni Hesus shrine in Lucban, Quezon.
It is also a popular pilgrimage site for the devotee and a popular Holy Week destination.
Healing mass is also conducted at the chapel.
One of the main attractions in the shrine is the 305 steps before you reach the 50-foot statue of the Ascending Christ.
The image of ascending Christ welcomes you to his arms, embracing the sinners and the lost one into his loving arms.
Reflections: We tend to forget to thank our Lord in every great moment we have and we always remember him in times of our troubles.
During that time, one of our brothers is in his soul searching journey and he keeps on asking himself, why those things happened to me? Why is it that I can't go to my next destination? Bro.
Jervie answered him: "Kaya ka nagkaganyan kasi may isang bagay ka pa na kailangang ayusin at ang Diyos ay tutulong sa iyo para ayusin ang mga bagay na sasagabal sa daan mo ."
God never abandon his children.
Every time we encounter some problems in our way, always remember to pray.
We may not receive the exact answer but that answer is best for us.
Let us have humility in our hearts, humility that will bring us in peace and into his arms.
Wherever we go, we always leave a mark in that place and that place leaves a mark in our hearts.
The mark that is embedded in our hearts signifies the place that gave us a lesson to learn, an experience to remember and a challenge that we face after we leave.
Every journey teaches us a lesson, which will help us to be strong and wise with hope in our hearts.

2015 Korean Film Festival highlights depth of human relationships, 2015 Korean Film Festival highlights depth of human relationshipsTHE Korean Cultural Center in the Philippines  and the Embassy of the Republic of Korea will be opening its annual Korean Film Festival this September to October with the theme 201cStrings of Affinity.201d
In cooperation with the Film Development Council of the Philippines , the Film Cultural Exchange Program, Korean Film Council, Korea Copyright Commission, Korea Tourism Organization, SM Cinema and SM Supermalls., the film festival will be featuring seven films that showcase the depths of human relationships in different scenarios.
The film festival will kick off in SM Lanang Premiere in Davao from September 17 to 20 and will be stopping by SM City Iloilo from September 24 to 27.

From October 1 to 4, the film festival will move to SM City Cebu and will have its final run in SM Megamall in Manila from October 8 to 11.
The Films
One of the top grossing films in Korea, 201cThe Thieves201d is about a group of South Korean thieves led by Popie  and Hong Kong thieves commissioned by the master thief Macao Park  to steal the diamond 201cTear of the Sun201d.


Having their own special skills in stealing, the two teams work together in the biggest heist of their lives, but little do they know that the 10 thieves all have their own agendas.
In 201cMiss Granny201d, the 74-year-old widow Oh Mal-Soon is transformed back to her 20-year-old self after having her photo taken at a mysterious photo studio.


With no one recognizing her, Mal-soon decides to make the most out of this once-in-a-lifetime opportunity.

She renames herself Oh Doo-ri and decides to pursue her dream of becoming a singer together with her grandson Ji-ha who doesn2019t realize that she is his grandmother.
Han Hyo-Joo plays the role of Yoon-Joo in 201cCold Eyes." 
She is a newly accepted member of the surveillance team in the police department.


Together with the team2019s leader Detective Hwang , they are tasked to take down James'  bank robbing criminal group.

However, the surveillance team is having a hard time to track down the robbers due to their masks and efficiency during the heist.
Set in the 1950s, 201cFront Line201d tells the story of Kang Eun-pyo  who is sent to join the Alligator Company at Aerok Hill.


Upon arriving at Aerok Hill he is surprised to see his old friend Kim Soo-hyuk , who was missing and presumed dead, alive and an officer of the Alligator Company.

Soo-Hyuk is now a ruthless officer and does not always follow commands from the South Korean army.

The situation within the Alligator Company raises many questions in the eyes of Eun-Pyo: South Korean soldiers wear North Korean uniforms inside due to the cold weather; a young officer leads the troops as a captain; the sudden reappearance of Soo-hyuk; and a secret communication box wherein North and South Korean soldiers can exchange letters and presents to each other.
Based on a true story, 201cHope201d tells the story of a family coping up with the tragic incident that happened to their daughter.


A young girl named So-won  was on her way to school when she was sexually assaulted and nearly beaten to death by a drunken old stranger.

As a result of the incident, she suffered from both physical injuries and severe emotional trauma.
As they continue to recover on the incident while pursuing justice, the family also begins to strengthen their relationship.
A romantic comedy film, 201cMarriage Blue201d tells the misadventures of four engaged couples who are having second thoughts about marriage.


The first couple, Tae-Kyu  and Joo-Young , is in the middle of planning their wedding when Tae-Kyu discovers that Joo-Young is a divorcee.

Tae-Kyu feels betrayed making him think twice about their marriage.
2PM2019s Ok Taecyeon plays the role of Won-Cheol, who is about to marry his longtime girlfriend So-Mi.

A few days before their wedding date, So-Mi travels to Jeju Island where she meets the tour guide and web comic writer Kyung-soo  and she falls in love with him.

The third couple is about an old bachelor, Gun-Ho, and his young foreigner fianc\xe9e Vika.
Gun-Ho is afflicted with impotency caused by his insecurities and stress thinking that Vika is only marrying him to obtain Korean citizenship.

The last couple, Dae-Bok and Yi-ra, is about to have a shotgun wedding due to Yi-Ra2019s pregnancy.

In the middle of their wedding preparations, Dae-Bok is starting to think twice about the marriage because of Yi-Ra2019s attitude so he tries to convince her to postpone the wedding.
Shot in documentary style, 201cDuresori: Voice of the East201d is based on a true story of Seul-Gi and Ah-Reum who are third year students at the National High School of the Traditional Arts.

During their final summer they are forced to join the school choir in order to fill the remaining requirement.

A conflict also arises between Ms.
Ham, their instructor who majored in western music, and the students, who majors in traditional Korean music.

However, as Ms.
Ham and the students begin to grow interest in each musical forms, the school decide to cancel the class2019s annual summer concert.
All films are with English subtitles.
Admission is free to all.
For more details, contact the Korean Cultural Center at 555-1711, or email events@koreanculture.ph.
You may also log on to koreanculture.ph.

Life as a pro, Life as a pro
Tancontian Diao
Karina V.
Canedo, ERIC Tancontian Diao, aka Erick Montre, is a professional singer/composer/record producer and part time host.
Davao-born and raised, he is currently based in Osaka.

He's been around in the entertainment world for the past 30 years.
He travelled to Hong Kong and Indonesia as a lead singer of different bands.
He was a stage TV and concert hall performer at Holiday Inn Hotel, Philippine Plaza, Sheraton Hotel, Dusit Hotel, Araneta Coliseum, Philippine Icc, Folk arts Theater, Eat Bulaga, GMA SUPER SHOW and more.

As a singer, he's been through a lot as he already performed with some big names in the Philippines such as Jun Polistico, Lovely Rivero, Richard Reynoso, Lloyd Umali, Chad Borja, 747 Band, Pilita Corales, Max Surban, Yoyoy Villame, Arthur Manuntag, WADAB and a lot more.

He had also performed together with world renowned artists Christopher Cross, Peabo Bryson and Paul Williams.
"It just happened that I met then in a concert, then jamming.
Ang feeling dili kabayran ug kwarta ," Diao said.
He said he performs a wide variety of music from jazz down to standard, rock and roll, pop disco and more.

His music influences are The Earth, Wind and Fire, Stylistics, Manhattans, Barry White, the Temptations, Four Tops, Lou Rawls, Barry White, Matt Blanco, Chuck Berry and More.

In 1994, he was lucky to become a member of a boy band Flippers 3rd generation under Alpha records.
This is the group who popularized the song Di Ako Iiyak.
As a composer, he started writing songs since his high school years in the early 80's and in 2004, some of his songs were aired by ABS-CBN during the Araw ng Dabaw.
The song was entitled "Ciudad sa Dabaw" and performed by Yoyoy Idol Suave.
Another song composition "Magkaisa sa Mundo" was used for Pasko Fiesta ni Mayor Rody Duterte performed by WADAB artists.
Another song still by him, "Ikaw ang Miss Universe Sa Puso ko," was used for the Mutya ng Dabaw 2004, which he performed himself.

Six years ago, he released his self produced CD under Wadab records an Indie Label in Japan and it became a huge success.
He followed this up in 2011 with "Girl from Ternopil." 
Diao is a son of a carpenter, who is proud of having helped build the newer building of Kapitan Tomas elementary school way back 1970s.
His mother was a stay at home mom.
He grew up in Catalunan Grande.
He discovered his talent when he was in grade school way back 1975, and since then, he involved himself in every contest or in school programs.

Eric was only 15 years old when he started competing in amateur singing contests.
He had his big break when he won as runner up for the Super Wheel Search for Singing Stars for the year's 1983 and 1984.
He also became a three-week champ of Bagong Kampeon in 1986 and a grand finalist of Pasikatan sa Trese with Imelda Papin in 1994.
Diao remembers how he struggled hard as a local artist.

"In Davao, there are a lot of talents but then, there are very few opportunities for us.
That is the reason I have to try my luck in Manila back in the early 80's and luckily, I've got an offer to work in Olongapo in 1985 and since then nagtuloy-tuloy na and I would like to take opportunity to thank my brother Ronnie for helping me when I was still struggling during my early years in my music life," Diao said.

Diao said that his brother Ronnie had a band in Olongapo and it became his training ground on music.
After his brother's band was disbanded, he was hired as a regular band member/singer at El Camarote bar in Holiday Inn Manila.
It was in 1988, when his band got an offer to perform at Kyoto.
 
"Well, ever since, I was always dreaming about music and I just want to fulfill it in it in the land of the rising sun.
As we all knew if you say Japan, sabi nila andito na halos lahat but it took me a lot of courage, hardwork, patience, sacrifice and hearthaches before I consider myself as a successful singer/composer/producer in Japan," he said.
He said that Davao city formed a big part of where he had honed his skills and talent that is why he wants to go back here someday, it's part of his dream to share his original compositions to the new pool of young talents.

Diao was born May 12, 1966.
He is the youngest of eight siblings of the family.
 He is currently living in Osaka, Japan.
 He is married to Kumiko Hashimoto for 17 years and he is now a Japanese national.
They have no kids but they have a dog, their eight-year-old little angel they named Brutus, a golden retriever.
Diao expressed his thanks to Elizabeth Fronda, Yoshimito Maasaki, Iwata  Ariza Emotera, Freddy Maria Wilma, Jhun Saarenas, Lyn Jones, Yuki Sky Con, Joy Abella Loregas, Jos Garcia, Alex Ebarle, Ray & Winner Asidor, Theresa Quintos and Kaka, , Osaka Kayo, Sakata Keiko , MIKE , Mama Rina , Olson Solon , Diao Family, Jade March Hipe, Karen Gay Garcia, DJ Heart Aveena,, Gigi Herrera, Jose & Mary Alba  Ogiyama Motoko of Emi Records.
Women's Week in the City of San Fernando, Women's Week in the City of San FernandoIan Ocampo Flora, THE\xa0month of September, in the capital City of San Fernando, is always a jubilant time for women as the city and its partner organizations and departments join in week long series of event highlighting women empowerment and recognizing the pivotal role of women in community and nation building.\xa0 
This year's celebrations carry the theme "Kababaihan: Kaapantay sa Karapatan, Kaagapay sa Kaunlaran."
The city has started its events this year with a launching of the executive order on the breastfeeding policies in the City Government.\xa0 
This is the city's way of complying with the provision of Republic Act 10028 or the Expanded Breastfeeding Act of 2009.
According to the 2013 survey, 62 to 65 percent of mothers breastfeed their children.

In previous years, the figure was only 45 to 48 percent.
It said that there is no formula milk that can replace breast milk, which contains colostrum, vital in providing nutrients for infants below six months old.
The city had launched its own breastfeeding event last August.

City officials offered flowers at the foot of the monument of local heroine Nicolasa Dayrit at the Heroes Hall.\xa0 
Vice Mayor Jimmy Lazatin was more than proud when he said that the city has paid their respects to the local heroine for 11 years now.\xa0 He added that Fernandina women can learn from the life of Dayrit.\xa0 
Lazatin said that Nicolasa, together with other Capampangan ladies during the Philippine Revolution, was a heroine in the revolution against Spain and also served as volunteer at the military hospital during the Filipino-American War in 1899.
The city also awarded this year's winners of the Natatanging Fernandina 2015 Awards.\xa0
 According to Women2019s Week 2015 Chairperson Dr.
Leticia Yap, the title was given to someone who has an important contribution in their community by using her talents, knowledge and skills in honing and helping others.
201cAng puso, isip at kaluluwa niya ay nakahandang tumulong sa kapwa niya Fernandino.
Yan po ang ating basehan sa pagpili ng nanalo.
Yung kaniyang community involvement, impact of her projects at maging ang mga testimonya ng kaniyang mga kasamahan sa komunidad ang siyang magpapatunay na siya ay karapat dapat,201d said Dr.
Yap.
The city also hosted medical mission for the health needs of indigent women and their families, Zumba exhibitions to promote regular exercise among women and even hosted a dance for a cause at the Heroes Hall.\xa0 
Recognizing the need for skills empowerment, the city also hosted a candle making seminar and advanced women ideals through a poster making contest at the SM City Pampanga.

For his part, Mayor Ewin Santiago stated the difference of the women before and the women of today, clearly pointing out that the women community now is much stronger and braver than ever before, establishing their own names and letting the society know what they are capable of.
201cAng kababaihan ngayon ay isa na ring pundasyon ng katatagan dito sa ating siyudad, isa silang dahilan kung bakit patuloy ang pagunlad ng siyudad,201d said Mayor EdSa.
September has never been this meaningful for women in the City of San Fernando.\xa0 
***
For comments, suggestions, violent reactions, invites, indignant rebuttals and what-have-you email: ianocampoflora@yahoo.com.
Apples and Oranges , Apples and Oranges Roark L.
Masbad, Wacky Tech, LAST September 9, Apple, just like clockwork, did a special event to announce new products and updates to the current product line.
For an Apple fan like me, this was something to look forward to because it also was the announcement of the new iPhone.

In a nutshell, updates were announced for the iPhone, iPad.
A new product was also announced - Apple Pencil.
And the release of iOS 9 on September 16.

I won2019t go into too much boring detail about what2019s new with the iPhone except to say that 201cthe only thing that2019s changed is everything."
Here2019s the intro video of the new iPhone.

The more exciting thing for me though during that event was the new iPad Pro.
Yes, you read that right - PRO.
It2019s one huge iPad and it2019s magnificent in my own terms.
It2019s already making me allocate funds so I can get one soon.

Here2019s the intro video.

And the second exciting thing for me is the Apple Pencil.
Yes, it2019s called that.

Here2019s the intro video.

Combine the two -- iPad Pro and Apple Pencil and you get an awesome alternative to the other tablet and pen combo for your digital creativity works.
The Wacom series of products come to mind here.
If in that line you need to have the Cintiq to be able to work directly on the screen and on the image itself, you won2019t have to with the iPad Pro paired with the Apple Pencil.
The possibilities are just endless for everyone.
Every.
One.

If you want to know more about the new releases, rewatch the Apple Special Event.

The right over Davao's water, The right over Davao's water
 DAVAO.
A motorcycle driver gets a hand to bring his motorcycle loaded with farm produce across Upian River in Barangay Marilog, Davao City.

Tyrone Velez, THE Earth we have is covered with water.
But only two percent of this is fresh water, in which two-thirds are frozen and one-third is surface water and groundwater.
The scarcity also affects us in Davao City and the rest of Davao Region.
For this reason, the Ateneo de Davao University held a Right to Water Conference on September 7 to discuss with stakeholders from environment groups, public utilities corporations, business groups, indigenous peoples, academe, religious, lawyers and the consuming public the balance between utilizing and protecting the vital resource.
Protection
The main threat to water aside from the impact of climate change is the 201ca problem of perspective201d as Professor Lourdes Simpol from Ateneo's Tropical Institute for Climate Studies  points out.
201cWe have a very populated people in a very small area.
But there's a matter of looking at water resources, do they just look at what they can profit without looking at the upstream like IP communities and farms and at the downstream such as lakes,201d she pointed out.
Environment groups such as Interface for Development Interventions  and the Save Mainit River Campaign based in Nabunturan showed the threats of agribusiness and mining affecting rivers and biodiversity in their areas.
IDIS' executive director Mary Ann Fuertes pointed out that even banned substances such as DDT can still be traced in plantations, and she warns the continued use of toxic chemicals in plantations near watersheds could contaminate our source of drinking water permanently.
201cThe examples of other countries show that they abandon groundwater as it takes years of natural treatment,201d she told reporters during the conference.
But for now, Fuertes said our water source is safe but 201cif we tap surface water there is the threat of contamination from agricultural chemicals.201d
Nabunturan Councilor Alexander Agustin from the Save Mainit Campaign also raised concern that mining activities have encroached on the national conservation area that is Mainit.
He points out the value of Mainit River to the provinces of Compostela Valley and Davao del Norte.
201cMainit is part of the headwater basin for Manat River, which is one of the main tributaries of the Agusan River.
It is the source of biodiversity, natural medicines and natural capital for our ecotourism,201d warns Agustin.
Fuertes and Agustin both said it's been an uphill battle to lobby with local governments and agencies to strictly enforced laws to protect water systems.
201cWe hope the government would declare the whole area of our drinking source as a watershed protection area,201d said Fuertes.
Agustin has lobbied with provincial officials to enforce the protection of Mainit as National Integrated Protected Areas System  area and expansion of this area.
But he finds opposition from miners who want to classify some of the conservation area as part of the minahang bayan.
Mining's threat to water, according to Philippine Misereor Partnership's Edel Garingan, consists of exploiting water for their mineral processing, deforestation that leads to defiling of water resources.
Misereor has launched its 2Big campaign, a play on the word tubig, to highlight the need to oppose the Tampakan Copper Project in Southern Mindanao that threatens farms and rivers.
Garingan points out that the Tampakan Project requires digging holes up to 785 feet deep and 500 hectares wide, big enough to displace 80,000 farmers in South Cotabato province alone and affect three main river sources including Taplan, Alip, and Padada.
Utilizing water
The conference also gave the proponents of the Apo Agua Davao City Bulk Water Project a venue to present the rationale of their project that will source water from the Tamugan River.
The project is a joint venture between the power company Aboitiz Group with the Davao City Water District and JV Angeles Corporation.
Aboitiz' First Vice President Manuel Orig explained the P10-billion project targets Tamugan River as the new source of water for Davao City in order to rest the dependency on the city's ten groundwater sources and reduce cost in the process.
Stakeholders raised concern on the impact of climate change to the water resources as well as the possibility of the rising cost of water using this new technology.
Apo Agua's engineer Ronald Munoz assured that the water supply will cost lower from the current P17 per cubic liter to P12, and it targets to serve a growing city with a projected population of 1.7 million by 2019.
Conflict
With such issues from utilities to investments affecting water sources, there are these words of caution from the Ateneo community.
Ateneo's Fr.
Dan McNamara from the Environment Studies Program noted the niche of the Philippines is it ranks among the top five in biodiversity areas.
But he warns of the dangers of agribusiness.
201cTo wipe them out for monocropping is not the way to proceed.
For monocropping is a capitalistic motivation using artificial means,201d he warned.
McNamara is also initiating a monitoring scheme in the University on Aboitiz' Therma South coal-fired power plant in Binugao, Toril, in which environment groups raised concern on the possible air and water pollution brought by this venture.
The plant's operation has been moved from this year to 2016.
201cAboitiz is profit-driven, but not necessarily.
We citizens have to step forward,201d he said.
Prof.
Simpol also urged leaders to strictly stop mining activities.
201cThere are No-Go Zones , but there are still existing MPSAs operating, and we have an over-saturation of mining operations.
We already have a diminishing forest cover, personally, we have to stop everything and make an inventory on how much forest cover we have.201d
Atty.
Romeo Cabarde from Ateneo's Community Engagement and Advocacy Council said 201ca statement will be drafted to highlight the people's right to water as a right to life, which should be tied as an important agenda for the 2016 elections.201d
University President Fr.
Jose Tabora rounded up the discussions with his criticism on mining and other investments as inevitable in the process of development.
201cLet us look at Surigao, Benguet and other areas and see the great environment destruction and great harm.
It now threatens us here in Southern Mindanao,201d Tabora warned.
Tabora echoed Pope Francis' encyclical Laudito Si to take care of the environment.
The Pope mentioned that 201ccontrol of water by large multinational businesses may become a major source of conflict in this century.201d
201cWe're not talking here about the right to have gold or copper, but the right to water that we all must decide.
If we stand for our right to water and food not only against foreigners but also against Filipino capitalist,201d he urged.
Beatbox royalty, Beatbox royalty
OUT-OF-THE-BOX BEATS.
With top-notch talent and a bit of luck, Alexander Cabig Jr.
topped 201cBeatbox Battle: The Uprising 2014,201d making him Cebu City2019s top beatboxer.
Yet beatboxing2019s young ambassador has merely scratched the surface of his musical abilities.
Deneb R.
Batucan, Cebu City2019s top beatboxer is just getting warmed up
, FOR Alexander Cabig Jr., Lady Luck has always been good to him.
The young beatboxer almost lost the championship during his very first beatbox battle last December.
If it wasn2019t for the crowd shouting for an encore, he wouldn2019t have won first place during the 201cBeatbox Battle: The Uprising 2014,201d and he wouldn2019t be sitting on his throne as the best beatboxer in Cebu.
Rednax, as he calls himself when he steps on stage, was closer to placing second during his battle with Trouble H, a young French beatboxer.
When the crowd wanted more, the judges permitted an excess of 30 seconds for each beatboxer to prove their worth.
Luckily, Alexander was prepared.
He had a beatbox piece and extra beats on hand, which he readied earlier just in case.
Because of that, he snatched the first prize from his competitor, Trouble H, who, Alexander mused, was so talented as well.
201cIt was by far the best moment of my life,201d he quipped.
More on this story in Sun.Star Weekend's September 13 issue.
 Click here to read more.

Brighter Giant Lantern Festival this 2015, Brighter Giant Lantern Festival this 2015Ian Ocampo Flora, THERE is no stopping this year's Pampanga Giant Lantern Festival scheduled on December 19 at its long time venue, host Robinsons Starmills Pampanga as 11 barangays will join this year's competition that aims to promote the popular cottage industry into the national and international scene.
Giant Lantern Festival Foundation president Alfrito Mah said that the participants this year are an improvement from the previous competitions as more and more barangays are joining in the festival.
 
Some P3 million has been allotted to help the festival and as way of support to the participants for this year's competition.
Now at its 107th year, the festival remains strong and vibrant.
City Tourism Officer Ching Pangilinan was quick to note that the festival is a testament to community involvement and the bayanihan spirit.

The lanterns are made and funded by the community, aside from the funding subsidy coming from the city government.
Lantern makers, electricians and ordinary folk volunteer time and effort to make the lanterns beautiful and up to competition standards.
 
This is not a surprise since the winning barangay takes the honor of having produced the best lantern for the season and each award is a bragging right against competing barangays.
Mayor Edwin Santiago said that they are also focusing on helping the industry penetrate the international market through more quality made lanterns.
 
This is in response to the current situation in which lanterns made in ordinary lantern makers could not penetrate the international market due to safety issues.
 
Despite of this, the city's lanterns, locally known as Parul Sampernandu, have been exhibited abroad.
Aside from China, the Parul Sampernandu has been in Hollywood in 1993, a year before, at the World Expo in Spain, the Philippines' embassies and consulates in Canada, Malaysia, Poland, Russia, Thailand and the United States, among others.

The city's lanterns had also decorated areas such Austrian landmarks as the Rathausplatz and Ethnology Museum in Vienna, as well as the Stadtturm in Innsbruck, including the Lord Mayor's House in Dublin and the Good Shepherd Cathedral in Singapore.
What started as a lantern contest to honor and thank then President Manuel Quezon for converting Mount Arayat into a tourist resort had turned into a yearly spectacle.

The Giant Lantern Festival has become an annual festival held in December  in this city.

The popularity of the festival has earned the province the nickname "Christmas Capital of the Philippines".

The GLF is a competition of 10 to 12 feet height lanterns that are made by barangays with standing lantern-making traditions.
The award is seen as a recognition from atop of the significance of the lantern industry here in helping local tourism and craftsmanship of local craftsmen and artisans.

This city's Giant Lantern Festival has been named first runner-up for Best Tourism Event, Arts and Culture category city level, during the National Pearl Awards held in Legazpi City in 2013.
 
In 2014, the Giant Lantern Festival  committee has made another historic first with the release of the first ever coffee table book chronicling the Giant Lantern Festival and a children's book on the world famous tourist attraction.
This year, the competition aims to draw more crowd to the annual event.
 Festival Committee chair Ernesto Cunanan is optimistic that this year's event will add another dazzling color to the proud tradition of lantern making in the capital city.
***
For comments, suggestions, violent reactions, invites, indignant rebuttals and what-have-you email: ianocampoflora@yahoo.com .
7 Reasons Why You Should Own a Haima Today, 7 Reasons Why You Should Own a Haima Today1.
IT'S REAL VALUE FOR YOU HARD EARNED MONEY.
The fuel efficient mini car , the game-changing sedan , and the sporty but affordable hatchback  are now available for as low as P50,000 all-in low downpayment.

Your cleverly comfortable SUV which Top Gear Philippines described as 201centicing,201d Haima S52019s price starts at P849,000.
For business, for passenger service, or for your families comfort, the Haima Fstar PC, Fstar 5, and Fstar Dropside are now available for as low as P40,000 all-in low down payment.

2.
GREEN ENGINE
Environment-friendly, engines? That's under the hood of every Haima vehicles.
HAIMA vehicles are powered by Euro 4 and now Euro 5 compliant engines, way beyond the standard Euro 2 engine compliance specs of brands currently in the Philippine market.
 What does this mean? You get power on the road but less carbon emissions.

3.
THE BEST OF AUTOMOTIVE2019s MIND COMBINES
The best of automotives mind combined.
Every HAIMA vehicle has that European-designed touch: modern, sleek, functional along with Japanese technology.
Aesthetics, versatility and science, they're all meshed in a HAIMA.
4.
BOSCH ENGINE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM UNDER THE HOOD
Every HAIMA vehicle boasts of Bosch-powered engines.
That's reliable German power technology for you.
What's more, from these Bosch engines come great fuel economy.
Technology and fuel efficiency,
HAIMA has it all.
5.
 GUARANTEED PARTS AND AFTER SALES SERVICE
Ensuring every HAIMA vehicles is roadworthy, parts and after sales are no-worries.
Efficient staff and seasoned technicians are ready to provide quality parts and service, that's the HAIMA guarantee.
6.
UP TO 3 YEARS WARRANTY: PEACE OF MIND 
It speaks well of brand trust.
Simply put, that's HAIMA2019s guarantee for quality.
7.
THE NAME BEHIND THE LOGO
Compared to other Chinese car manufacturers, Haima Philippines is playing the long game in its entry into the Philippine market, concentrating its marketing and sales efforts up in the countryside.
It gradually built up a loyal following, which the company behind it believes to be great for customer service.

HAIMA cars are distributed in the country by the LAUS AUTO GROUP , one of the Philippines' largest multi brand dealership network and one of automotive industry's most respected institutions.
With HAIMA and LAG, that's more than a guarantee.
So, if your checklist for your next brand new car has all these, really, you have all the reason to own a HAIMA.

For more of Haima, visit Haima Cars Pampanga, Haima Cars San Fernando, or Haima Cars Dau.
Or call 0918-854-2210.
Log on www.haima.com.ph! 
Haima: Shift to Difference!
Bee stings, research that makes you go 'huh?' win Ig Nobels, Bee stings, research that makes you go 'huh?' win Ig Nobels
Michael Smith, left, accepts his trophy from Dudley Herschbach, the 1986 Nobel Laureate in Chemistry, while being honored during a performance at the Ig Nobel Prize ceremony at Harvard University, in Cambridge, Mass., Thursday, Sept.
17, 2015.

BOSTON 2014 A Cornell University graduate student who allowed honeybees to sting him in 25 places and a group of scientists who concluded it's possible for one man to father 888 children are among the winners of this year's Ig Nobels, which honor humorous scientific achievement.
Michael Smith estimates he was stung about 200 times during his 2012 honeybee study.
His conclusion: The three most painful places to get stung are the nostril, the upper lip and the male sex organ.
"A sting to the nostril is so painful it's like a whole body experience," he said.
Other winners being honored Thursday night at the 25th-annual ceremony at Harvard University include a trio of linguists who discovered that almost every language in the world uses the word "huh" for clarification in a conversation and researchers who found that corporate CEOs take less professional risk if directly affected by a natural disaster as a child.
Real Nobel laureates hand out the prizes, and winners receive a cash award: a Zimbabwean 10 trillion dollar bill, the equivalent of a couple of U.S.
dollars.
Smith shared the Ig Nobel for physiology and entomology with Justin Schmidt, an adjunct professor at the University of Arizona who devised a pain scale for insect stings.
His advice: Do not get stung by the tarantula hawk, a nasty looking wasp found in the Southwestern U.S.
with a stinger about a quarter-inch long.
"The sting is entirely nontoxic but hurts like the bejesus," Schmidt said.
Mark Dingemanse and two colleagues at the Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics in Nijmegen, Netherlands, won the Ig Nobel for literature for determining that the word "huh" is used in languages around the world, including some of the most obscure.
"A system for fixing misunderstandings is clearly a crucial part of language," he said.
"'Huh?' is one element of this system: It's the basic error signal people fall back on if all else fails."
Elisabeth Oberzaucher and a colleague at the University of Vienna in Austria won the mathematics prize for figuring out whether it was possible for Moroccan Emperor Moulay Ismael to have sired 888 children 2014 and that's the conservative estimate.
Ismael fathered the children during a roughly 30-year reign that ended in 1727.
It sounds exhausting, but the bottom line is, yes, it is possible to father that many children if he had sex daily.
The study found that it could be done with as few as 65 women, not the 500 in his harem.
Raghu Rau, professor of finance at the University of Cambridge, and his colleagues won for their study that found business leaders more directly affected by natural disasters as children took less risk during their careers.
Rau uses Apple as an example.
Late CEO Steve Jobs, who lived through a deadly landslide near his home in San Francisco as a child, ran the company conservatively.
His successor, Tim Cook, witnessed few fatalities despite regular tornadoes while growing up in Alabama and has made more risky business decisions.
"Think of yourself as a member of a board of directors: When you try to hire a CEO, do you want a risk taker or not?" Rau said.
As usual, the winners were thrilled with the honor.
"Sometimes these crazy things provide a lot of insight," said Schmidt, the bug guy.

Pe\xf1afrancia novena masses begin September 18, Pe\xf1afrancia novena masses begin September 18
Our Lady of Pe\xf1afrancia
NOVENA masses for the Our Lady of Pe\xf1afrancia, patroness of Bicolandia, begins today, September 18, at 6 p.m.
at the Capitol Parish social hall, Escario St., Cebu City.
The masses will run for nine days until September 26, to be followed the next day, a Sunday, September 27, with the fiesta mass to be celebrated by Bicolano priests.
On weekdays, the novena mass will be at 6 p.m., and on weekends at 5:30 p.m.
With renovation work at the church, the mass will be held at the social hall Monday to Saturday, and at the gymnasium on Sundays.
The Bicol Association of Cebu Inc.
is organizing the fiesta activities.
All devotees to the Ina or the Our Lady of Pe\xf1afrancia are invited to attend the fiesta activities and masses.
 
A life lived with God, A life lived with GodChristine Joice C.
Cudis, TODAY, students are educated in a more advanced way, encouraging them to practice an open mind On sensitive issues such as religion.

As a result, most of the millenials show acts of doubt when confronted with the topic of God's existence.
With this pattern in hand, we can ask: Does acquiring heightened intelligence really translate to realizing that God is not that useful at all? 
Maybe for some, it's a yes.
But for Jeffer Joy Orteza, a Cum Laude graduate from Humanities Division of the Ateneo de Davao University and a dedicated member of the Jehovah's Witness Church, it's definitely the other way around.
"I believe that a truly intelligent being should acknowledge that there can be no intellect without God's presence; that the cause cannot be irrelevant to the effect.
God is the Great Cause of every intelligent effect that this universe sees.
Discounting him from this world's equation is, therefore, impossible." said Orteza.
She is also aware of the prejudice on intelligent people that they should not believe in anything spiritual because it is too much of a leap of faith, "in reality, those who do not believe in what transcends the physical universe is taking a plunge to irrationality." she clarified.
Orteza grew up in a Christian household of Jehovah's Witnesses.
They had Bible study sessions where she learned so many things about the world- why things are not perfect now and why that does not mean that God is not doing anything about it.
While her family's spirituality has certainly played a huge role in her beliefs, she did not choose to become a Jehovah's Witness until the age of 14 when she was sure that she fully understood what she believes in.

"Choosing to live and think as a Christian has its challenges, especially when I get to meet people who do not view spiritual things the way I do," she said.

She and her family takes part in different avenues of sharing Bible-based messages--either by distributing the Awake! and Watchtower journals or by encouraging people to visit their website, www.jw.org.

Being an Atenean, people could immediately think that she comes from a well off family, but she's not.

If not for the full scholarship granted by the institution, she would never have had been able to get her Bachelor's degree.

In fact, she can recall one of the darkest  part of her life was during her 2nd year high school.
Her family had to transfer to a house that did not have the luxury of running water or electricity.
For six years and 11 months, her family had to live with all the inconvenience.
Her school uniforms never got the chance to experience being ironed, and dinner was always by the candlelight.
Every day, they had to fetch water with pails from their neighbor.

Naturally, since they had no electricity, she had to rely on newspapers for news.
Since she could not afford to buy daily, she relies on the scraps of information that she would find on the front pages of newspapers hanging on newsstands then read more in the school library.

"The world is not beautiful now, and I do not disagree.
But just because things are ugly now does not mean that God is useless.
We need to remember that we, humans, are simply tinier than drops of water in God's eyes." Orteza said.
Indeed, we are the bearers of our future and it is up to us whether what to believe in and how to live our lives.
But certainly in Orteza's case, a life lived with God is a life lived accordingly.

Liyang: Weaving the Ata2019s future, Liyang: Weaving the Ata2019s future
Their native dresses may be faded, but the pride in what these represent shines through.

Ace June Rell S.
Perez, LIYANG, and how the intricately traditional basket weaves the Ata tribe2019s future.
Culture preservation, how the Ata tribe in Sitio Pegalahan, Barangay Pandaitan, Paquibato District, Davao City pass their cultural practices and authentic products to the next generation through weaving.
Liyang is an Ata word referring to a multipurpose basket which comes in many sizes and designs crafted by the women of the Ata tribe.
It is primarily made out of 201cBagtok201d, a family of the Bamboo tree usually found in the forest, Uway  and abaca.
More than just a basket, Liyang weaves the picture of Ata tribe in the next generation.

201cThis is authentically made by my tribe and our descendants shall know how to master the art of Liyang making.
This is part of the rich culture Ata tribe has and the best way of passing it to next generation is through the youth,201dConchita L.
Maclaan, 53, vice president of the Tribal Women Organic Village of the Ata tribe and a mother of seven said in vernacular.
Teaching the youth how to make such Liyang will define the tribe2019s future.

Learning the art of Liyang weaving from the young age of 8 years old, Maclaan shared that her parents did not teach her, she learned by watching and doing as she observes.
201cNagsugod ko otso anyos pero nientrada na gyud ko sa paghimo og Liyang apil na sa pagpanguha og Bagtok sa kalasangan mga dise otso ako anyos ,201d she said.
Paggama of Liyang 
From the main Barangay where the tribe lives to the forest where 201cbagtok201d, the major material for Liyang can be sourced, the Ata women will walk on a rough trail to the 201ckalasangan201d or forest, which translates to a four-hour walk .
Normally, they will get around eight tall 201cbagtoks201d from the forest.
This is enough to make five big Liyangs, which can be sold at P300 each.
A big Liyang takes three days to make.
201cUsually we go to the forest in two to five individuals but sometimes I go just by myself with my dagger, and basket.
This is our additional source of income aside from farming, it is more a way of livelihood,201d Maclaan said.
Liyang can be a basket where one puts grains of rice, vegetables, fruits, corn, among others.
The biggest Liyang is called Bukog while smallest one is named as Tahakan, which can be sold at only P10 to P20 each.
A Liyang with a cover is called Loban.
201cWe use Rattan or Uway as our thread and Puthaw or a narrow metal as some sort of needle in weaving Liyang,201d she narrated.
According to Maclaan, only three of them in their place are really into commercial Liyang making as other women in their area are only making for their own use.

201cBut we are encouraging them to continue doing it until they master the craft so they can sell it at the city and even to other market outside Davao,201d she added.
They were able to sell during the Kadayawan Festival, she said, they also display during special events for the indigenous peoples while Davao-based women2019s organizations order in bulk.
201cWe do it carefully and artistically to sustain our relationship with our customers,201d she said.
From the ancestors to the descendants
Liyang is intrinsically Ata and is a silent witness of the tribe2019s rich culture.
201cWe cannot imagine Ata life and culture without Liyang,201d Maclaan shared, thus, they are letting the young watch them weave the baskets.
 201cI2019d like the young Ata to learn the art of weaving Liyang the way how I learned it from my parents, they never taught me but they allowed me to learn by simply letting me watch them weave,201d she said.
Her18-year-old youngest daughter now knows how, but she still has to master the craft.
201cWe allow them to learn from us by just letting them watch us but one of our biggest challenges is how to convince them to do it with mastery because sometimes they get discouraged.
Mostly because weaving bagtok can wound the weaver,201d she said, a fact her daughter knows so well.
But she is confident that her daughter is learning and will soon pass on the craft to her offsprings.
Aside from Liyang the Ata Tribe also capable of producing Banig, Nigo, Tribal costumes, Baliog or accessories made of beads, among others.
Liyang, in weaving these baskets and passing on the craft, the Ata tribe likewise weaves their culture and passes this on to the generation next.

The steadfast stylepreneur, The steadfast stylepreneur
SERVICE MINDSET.
As a stylepreneur, Feline Soria loves dealing with different people: clients, suppliers, teammates and her production team.
Most of all, she considers the business profession as a form of service to others.
Deneb R.
Batucan, Stylish Feline Soria wears the core values of patience and perseverance with pride
, DYNAMIC and energetic, Feline Soria is force to be reckoned with.
An effortless people person, she projects a kind of confidence that is welcoming and even endearing.
It2019s no wonder why the proprietor of Let2019s Stylize is well-loved by her clients.
And when the clients are happy, business is definitely booming.
Let2019s Stylize is an online apparel shop that Feline single handedly worked from the ground up for four years now.
As a hands-on business owner, she handles everything from purchasing items from Bangkok to conceptualizing designs for her eponymous ready-to-wear collections Feline, to pricing and client meet-ups.
The key to her success? Persistence.
More about Feline Soria's story in Sun.Star Weekend's September 20, 2015 issue.
 Click here to read more.
Heneral Luna, Heneral LunaRoark L.
Masbad, Wacky Tech, EVERY now and then, a film comes out and deserves our full and undivided attention because it speaks of who we are as a nation, as a people.
It speaks also of our history and the imagery and symbolism it carries in relation to current times.

I am dedicating this week2019s column to Heneral Luna.
Like I said in one my Facebook posts, this film needs to be watched by every Pinoy.

Fueled by great reviews from all walks of Filipino life, it2019s on its second week being shown in movie houses nationwide.
Last week, it was almost pulled out of major malls2019 movie houses.
That was foiled after public clamor for it skyrocketed.


Like the page on Facebook -- https://www.facebook.com/Heneral.Luna -- for the latest update on screening schedules nationwide.
Elite chefs, Elite chefs
 DAVAO.
The winners of the Elite Chef Challenge at topmost photo are from left: Chef Rhran Bahi-an of Waterfront Insular Hotel; Chef Alex Destriza from Marco Polo; and Chef Edward Buas from Chippens buffet.

Christine Joice C.
Cudis, A TOTAL of 15 chefs from the top hotels, restaurants, and catering services from the Davao Region, Cagayan de Oro, and General Santos gathered at the Davao Convention and Trade Center on Thursday to face off in the Elite Chef Challenge of Unilever's Chefmanship Academy.
The chefmanship academy is the-first-of-its-kind seminar/workshop initiative in Southeast Asia.

The academy was developed by Unilever Food Solutions  to meet the diverse needs of the food industry's market players to enhance skill sets for service efficiency, customer satisfaction, and business profitability.
The challenge is the highlight of the 8th leg of the Chefmanship Academy in the Philippines.

Alex Destriza of Marco Polo went home with the bacon as he came out the champion, winning a P20,000 cash prize.
Although already in the industry for 18 years, he still did not expect to win knowing that he was competing with the top guns in Mindanao.

"It was really overwhelming," Destriza said, saying he enjoyed the competition.
"The contest itself is an inspiration.
I dedicate my win to God and my family.
Also, I am thankful for the support of my Marco Polo family and mentors," he added.
According to the judges: Jonathan Brando Santos, Senior Chef of UFS; Anton Abad, Executive chef of Vikings, and BJ Carreon, National sales manager of Unilever, it was a one tough competition to judge and the scores were really close.
In fact, the two runner-ups both received a score of 9.23 percent.
Rhyan Bahi-an from Chippens and Edward Buas from Waterfront Hotel won P10,000 each.
  
Executive Chef of USF, Joanne Limoanco-Gendrano said, "Consumers today has heightened their quality demand, with this expectation, the chefs must also continue to innovate with their dishes."
Gendrano added that creativity should be practiced in plating the food without losing the authenticity of its taste since a lot of consumers now are meticulous about what they eat.
Other chefs who attended the challenge were also applauded as they made the show very interesting.
Those who participated are Nilo Sumalinog from Royal Mandaya Hotel, Karlo Mercado from Jack's Ridge, Nazario Mamites from Garden Oases, Elias Ontolan from Pinnacle Hotels & Suites, Josephine Viray from Sy Bee Tin, Cervantes Buenaventura from Garden Bay, Gemboy Malicse from Delongtes, Precious Guinto from The Farm, Joel Gazo from Emars, Eduardo Repetillo from D'Leonor Hotel, Leo Bunani from Lim Kitkai Luxe Hotel, and Franklin Medina from Davao Convention.
The Chefmanship Academy will kick off next year in a bigger venue to cater to a bigger audience.
Our Lady of Fatima University Pampanga holds Sports Fest 2015, Our Lady of Fatima University Pampanga holds Sports Fest 2015CITY OF SAN FERNANDO -- Our Lady of Fatima University  Pampanga Campus held its Sports Fest 2015 themed 201cFour Campuses, One Team201d in this city recently.
With much festivity and excitement, the entire OLFU family opened the sports fest with a morning 53-vehicle motorcade around the City of San Fernando, participated in by students, non-teaching and teaching personnel who cheered and swayed to the university2019s theme music 201cRise to the Top!201d
The motorcade was well received by our dear students waving, shouting and showing their pride of being part of OLFU amid a background of colorful balloons of different colors and shapes.
The sports fest proper at the OLFU grounds and covered court hosted by Sir Mark Lawrence Valencia saw the parade of the different programs with their corresponding color codes, coordinators, and program heads, followed by the non-teaching personnel and most importantly, the presence of our campus administrator, Ms.
Muriel Caballero, accompanied by the Drum and Lyre of Baliti Integrated School.
The much awaited lighting of torch came next, passed on from one athlete to another, participated in by torch bearers from the non-teaching , teaching, student representatives from the college and BED and  administrators.

You could see the mixed emotions of the participants with in tears in their eyes and joy in them.
Sir Rafael Vicente Enriquez had the last hand and lighted the torch followed by his inspirational speech which formally opened the sports fest to the delight of everyone.
The roll call per program was done with simultaneous hoisting of the flags from the rooftop of the Blessed Francisco Building, bringing zest to students after hearing and seeing their corresponding programs presented.
The pledge of sportsmanship followed.
Sports plays a key role in the development of physical, social and emotional health of the youth, as their participation and enthusiasm actively promote their full and bright potentials.

The students showcased their talents especially the Fatima Performing Arts of Pampanga which  did the cheer dance.
It never ended there as parlor games were prepared not only for the students but also for the employees who very well participated.
The embodiment of JOY was conspicuous in the faces of our OLFU Pampanga Family.
This would have never materialized without the undying support of  the Board of Trustees, administrators, mid2013management, teaching, non-teaching, engineering, housekeeping personnel, students and our dear parents.
We thank the think tanks of this sports fest here in Pampanga--Mr.
Edison Ocampo, Mr.
Angel Tulabut, coordinators and program heads, Mr.
Shamlang, Mr.
Edel Bansil, Ms.
Jennyfier Santos and  Ms.
Muriel Caballero, our Campus Administrator.
And as we SHOUT, We RISE to the TOP, OLFU! 
Revel and revelation, Revel and revelation
MANILA.
Dr.
Gemino H.
Abad is an award-winning author of several books of poetry, short story and essay and a professor emeritus of the University of the Philippines.

Dr.
Gemino H.
Abad pays homage to language and literature and the power of imagination
, 201cWITHOUT language, the finest invention of the human imagination, there is no memory, no history, no culture, no civilization,201d said Dr.
G\xe9mino H.
Abad, revered poet and literary luminary, as he addressed a gathering of writers and the culturati during the awards night of the 65th Carlos Palanca Awards, the most prestigious literary contest in the Philippines.
Abad is a multi-awarded poet, essayist, fictionist and editor of several landmark literary anthologies and books that chart the history of Philippine literature in English.
 He has also won the Palanca Awards many times in the Poetry in English category, alongside other literary accolades such as the National Book Awards by the Manila Critics Circle, the Gawad Pambansang Alagad ni Balagtas and the Patnubay ng Sining and Kalinangan from the City of Manila, among others.
A democratic writing world
For him, the plurality of styles and schools of writing is indicative of a true democracy even in the writing world, and that not one true school should be considered the sole acceptable standard or even canon.
201cThere isn2019t, for instance, one way of writing the poem, for there are kinds and kinds of poems, depending only on one2019s principle of classification, and even the criteria of excellence for any literary work change over time, like any literary taste, fashion, or fad,201d he explained.
Language is the soul of a culture
Dr.
Abad also extolled on language being the essence and soul of a culture, and that writers are committed to forge and reinvent it for the latter to survive.
201cHe must work the language even as the farmer works the soil to produce his crop; as the writer works the language, he might also note that the ground of the language he employs is his people2019s culture and history, their day-to-day living in their own time and place.201d
Using poetry as the embodiment of all kinds of literary work, Abad told the audience of its importance in the culture of all humanity.
201cThe poem, the literary work, is a verbal artifact, its soul or inner form is its meaningfulness from reader to reader.
On its own terms, the poem, the literary work, is already an interpretation of a human experience.201d
The Filipino-ness in Philippine literature
Abad also spoke on the quintessential role of literature in the identity of the Filipino race.
201cOur own literature speaks in/from many tongues; what we have then is an archipelago of letters.
The hidden 2018diwa2019 or spirit there is our Filipino-ness which isn2019t an essence but a faith.
Filipino-ness is one2019s own individual sense of his country: his own people, their own culture and history as he understands it,201d he essayed.
Abad was conferred the Gawad Dangal ng Lahi, the Palanca Awards2019 special honorary award, by Carlos Palanca Memorial Awards for Literature Director-General Sylvia Palanca-Quirino and Carlos Palanca Foundation Vice President, Carl Anthony S.
Palanca, during the 2015 awards night held at Manila Peninsula.
A prolific writer, he has authored ten volumes of poetry, nine books of critical essays, and two short story collections.
 He also edited a landmark three-volume anthology of Philippine poetry and a six-volume historical anthology of Philippine short stories in English.
As professor of English literature and creative writing at the University of the Philippines, he also served at his alma mater in various capacities -- Secretary of the University, Vice-President for Academic Affairs and Director of the UP Creative Writing Center .
 He is now a professor emeritus of the University of the Philippines.

Explained: What is Mazda2019s KODO Soul of Motion Design Language?, Explained: What is Mazda2019s KODO Soul of Motion Design Language?IN RECENT years, with every new or redesigned Mazdas being unveiled, the automaker2019s 201crevolutionary201d design language was mentioned more often.

While it is easy to notice its impact on the automaker2019s lineup2014showing very sleek and attractive cars2014 perhaps, the actual philosophy needs more explanation2026
After its former chief designer, Laurens van den Acker left the company, taking his Nagare design language with him, his successor wanted to rework Mazda2019s design approach.

While Nagare focused on the flow of wind and water in nature, Mazda2019s global design head Ikuo Maeda2019s idea was to portray the pent-up energy of an animal about to pounce.
Hence, KODO2014--Japanese for 201csoul of motion201d2014was born.
KODO is an interpretation of potential energy in stationary forms .
The inspiration was taken from the stance of a powerful animal waiting to pounce or a sword ready to strike in the ancient Japanese martial art of kendo.
Mazda has three keywords which describe KODO: speed, tense, and appeal.
The design language aims to bring art and life into vehicle design, reflecting the heart and soul of the creator into the machine.
The model is poised with the power in its rear, rather than leaning forward.
201cThere2019s more to creating a car with soul than simply sculpting its physical form,201d explains the automaker2019s website.
201cMazda imbues its cars with soul through its quest to capture the dynamic beauty of life beyond the confines of conventional design.201d
Since then, KODO has remained the foundation of Mazda2019s model designs, influencing many vehicles in the most recent years.

Starting today until Sunday  Mazda LausGroup and Berjaya Philippines will showcase its 2015 Mazda Collection at Marquee Mall, Angeles City.
The weekend autoshow will feature Mazda 2 , Mx-5, CX-5, BT-50, and Mazda 6 .
Mazda enthusiasts will get a chance to see the all-new models up-close and will learn more about their specs, special features, and lowdown payment rates from the Mazda LausGroup2019s team itself.
2013PS de Leon
For more on Mazda, visit the new Mazda Pampanga showroom today along Jose Abad Santos Avenue, City of San Fernando Pampanga or call 0918-854-2711 or log on to www.LausAutoGroup.com.

LausAutoGroup: We have the Right Car for You! 
Follow your dream, Follow your dreamRhealyn C.
Pojas, TALKING to this man is like talking to a philosopher who would urge you to go after your dreams lest be left wondering over what ifs.

He is Emmanuel Nim, a 34-year old visual artist who was born in Polomoloc, South Cotabato.
At the age of five, he began to notice that he has this fascination in drawing and as the days unfold, he started to wield a brush to paint, but when he started to learn the art of replicating nature he also started to learn the art of crafting his dreams.

From that moment on, he did not only visualized objects and things of beauty, but he too visualized his dreams into reality.
He was not faltered by the obstacles that came his way as he continued to venture into that career.

201cPag may focus ka sa dream mo, walang impossible,201d Nim said with a hint of determination in his voice as he narrated his story to Sun.Star Davao in an interview.
So in 1998 after he graduated at Silway 8 National High School in Polomoloc, he packed his clothes to go to Manila where he knew he will find a job to support himself while pursuing a degree in Fine Arts at the University of the Philippines .
He needed to save money for school since his parents cannot support him financially what with his father working as heavy equipment operator and his mother as a housewife who needed to raise eight children including him.

When he reached Manila, he was able to work at an advertising shop where he designed billboards and was able to establish acquaintances with artists who frequented the shop.
By the year 2000, he stumbled into a Japanese man in Makati City who owned an art studio and later earned a living through it.
He also met a lot of fine arts students and that was the time when he was discouraged to pursue the same degree especially after meeting these students who sought help to him and even ask him to teach them do art when in fact he had not earned any degree in fine arts.

201cWhat are the Colleges teaching these students?201d Nim could not help but asked and so he did not go to College especially after that experience.
So he spent his time instead learning to paint on his own and through artists he had known and made friends with.
He recalled the times when he would often visit the Ayala Museum and got mesmerized by Amorsolo2019s paintings.
He also shared having to glue his eyes on books about Arts to read them.
Even though he did not earn any degree in College, he continued to explore and learn the field of visual arts until such time came when he become a member of Kapatiran at Ugnayan ng Natatanging Sining at Talentong Pilipino  through a fellow artist he met in 2011 through Kristy Fermin2019s Gallery.
Since then he had been doing a series of group exhibits with his fellow artists inside the country.
He was also one of the artists who painted the large portrait of the 44 members of the Philippine National Police Special Action Force  who had been slain in the Jan.
25 Mamasapano clash.
He collaborated with Fine arts graduates and professors for the piece and was lauded by his colleagues for his performance.
201cGi-appreciate nila ang presence nako sa pag paint namo atong SAF 44 incident,201d Nim said and further shared that a former dean at the College of Fine Arts in UP told him that he was humbled by Nim2019s story especially in knowing that Nim had learned the skills in art outside the four corners of the classrooms.
201cSabi ng Former UP Dean sa akin na napatunayan niya sa kanyang sarili na pwede ka palang matuto at maging magaling sa labas ng silid-aralan,201d Nim shared.
Nim continues to tour in the country to conduct art exhibits and workshop together with his colleagues in Kunts while he is also going to launch his first art exhibit outside the country by May next year in Germany.
Just last September 18, Nim together with his fellow artists had conducted an art exhibit and workshop at the Mezzanine of the Royal Mandaya Hotel in Davao City and proceeded to Makati the following day for another exhibit.
201cIf one really wants to do something, they just need to continue doing it and cultivate whatever it is that they have,201d Nim encouraged those aspiring visual artists before the interview ended.
Seeing or believing , Seeing or believing MOST people say that seeing is believing.
That only when proof is present will they remove their doubts and place their trust and understanding to the matter at hand.
Yet the same people rarely see.
They just take a glimpse and absorb the first thing they notice.
Whether it be how the environment is dying, or this politician is a fraud or the government2019s lack of concrete progress.

The point here is, how gullible we can be.
And how a situation can change depending on where we stand.

At a glimpse, a certain politician maybe considered perfect.
One that brings a refreshing change, a brave choice of actions and words and one that captured the hearts of the people.

At a close look, this brave and loud Mayor of our city has become a mass favorite.
One that speaks to the impatient and critical minds of the nation.
He is seen to be the ideal 201cnext president201d, one that can move and elicit change.

He is praised to be influential and powerful.
Powerful enough to dictate discipline from citizens and non-citizens alike.
From groups no other city makes deals with and groups most people fear.

Innovative in citywide decisions that promote growth and safety.
Like the strict implementation of the speed limit, the anti-fireworks ban and no smoking rule adorn his positive political image.
But like everything else, when you take a closer look, or pick a different part of the scene to observe, you see the cracks.
The flaws.

The fact that this politician might be sharpening his seemingly polished image for the 2016 Elections is present in thought.

Could this all be an act? A well played manipulation? A game observed for a long time to see the present government2019s weakness and prey on this?
And how about the so-called concern for the fairness and equality of all the citizens in Davao?  Is the promise for fairness and equality only applicable to a chosen few? Or the audience of TV only?
Perspective is a powerful tool.
It is a choice, a discernment that defines our choices and our beliefs.
It may be a sunny and green patch at one look, then a foggy unclear landscape the next.
Know where to look and where you2019ll believe in.
Because it2019s not just a small piece of the puzzle, but a big picture to discover.

Flying Pig Grilling now  , Flying Pig Grilling now  Stella A.
Estremera, FLYING Pig was introduced by buddy Carlos to us around two years ago.
It was intended as a weekend barbecue place in the ancestral house of his Lola, Tita Roskie Munda.

But life kept him busy, and so the idea was shelved, although the brick oven was already made.
Hmmmm2026 Now Carlos is back and Flying Pig is all set up, complete with lovely tile-topped tables that you wouldn2019t believe are actually those giant spools for wiring electric posts.
The concept remains: all meat eaten with the hands, like barbarians, and having fun.

It was a quiet night though, with just me and Trisha.
Imee2019s still out of the country, Deng had lots of stuff to do in the office, and Miggy2026 she2019s pesca-vegetarian.
But then, as Carlos said, 201cBakit, hindi ba ako kakain?201d 
The meal started with Flying Pig2019s one and only appetizer in the menu: chili con carne on nachos.
The beans in the chili were to be the last thing you will ever see that came from a plant.
Next came pork sisig in its greatest porky fattiest glory.
 
From the kitchen, Carlos asked, Neknek Mo or Pakpak Yu?  I chose wings as there was still the main course, and I already consumed my week2019s allowance for meat and animal fat.
It2019s buffalo wings in all its spiciness, so maybe had I chosen the neck then it would have been buffalo neck.
Trisha arrived by then and was savoring the sisig.
 That was just before Carlos plonked down the main course: one slab of oven-grilled pork ribs.
It was yummy.
Very yummy.
Too yummy.
I asked for suka with bawang and sili and earned the glare that could easily send weaker folks scampering away.
 
201cNobody adds suka to my ribs!201d boomed the cook, aka Carlos.
I stood my ground and demanded my suka and happily licked and slurped on afterwards.
It was delicious.
Super.
Just don2019t deprive me of my suka.
By the way, when they placed Lemonada under 201cBooze201d in their menu, it2019s because it is booze.
*Hic!* Flying Pig are only open for dinner for now as they perfect the time and motion in the kitchen.
It is at Casa Munda Garden at 826 Loreto St.
Juna Subd.
Matina.
Davao City.

For Dabawenyos, it2019s just near Philippine Women2019s College or Women2019s.
 Thus went my earlier conversation with the taxi driver.

Me: Juna 2018ta, 2018nong.
Driver: Asa ta agi, Boulevard o Quirino? Me; Bisa na sa lang kay duol ra man gud sa Women2019s, satunga-tunga sa Juna, bisa na sa pwede.
As we were along MacArthur Highway2026 Driver: Asa 2018ta muagi, ma2019am? Me: U-turn ra diha.
Driver: Diha 2018ta sa Shell o sa Ateneo.
Me: Pwede ba ikaw na pumili.
Sinabi ko namang doon tayo malapit sa Women2019s.
Bahala kana! Driver: Asa man diay dapit sa Women2019s? Me: Kung sasabihin ko sa Loreto, alam mo basa anang Loreto? Driver: Dili, ma2019am.
Me: Kaya nga.
So doon tayo malapit sa Women2019s.
End of story.
Light up like magic  , Light up like magic  Stella A.
Estremera, TECHNOLOGY never fails to surprise, and nothing is more surprising than being able to light up a bulb with your own thumb.
That was the fun we had with the Apua emergency LED bulb introduced over dinner by Winchester Lemen, president of Envirotech Waste Recycling Inc., last week.

It2019s a Malaysian technology, he said, and comes in 7, 9, and 12 watts.
It2019s like any other LED bulb, except that it has a built-in lithium ion battery that lights up when power is shut down.
You charge it to your regular socket for six hours and it2019s ready for use for up to five hours in very bright but not glaring white light.
And it2019s plastic.
Meaning, there is no risk of breaking it and you can carry it in your bag should you be going out for a camping or some outdoors activity.
Just moisten the electrical contact.

That was where the fun was because you can use your thumb to moisten the contact.
Just moisten your thumb, hold the bulb, and place the wet thumb on the bulb2019s contact and voila! You have just become a human torch.
Dinner with friends Emil, Christian, Mabelle, and Nina was highlighted with the game of who can light up the bulb fast.

For some unknown reason, it took Nina several tries before she could light it up.
The fast lighters? Me and Christian.
Suggested retail price is P1,200 and is handier than any rechargeable lamp in the market because it2019s just a bulb.

*****
You can email terraonetrading@gmail.com.
September 2015 musing: Touching base, September 2015 musing: Touching baseJinggoy I.
Salvador, JUST like old times.
That2019s how I am summing up September.

Traveling and not minding the red eye flight schedule because I was heading to a place I haven2019t seen in ages.
I wanted to see how things have turned up for this destination.
Revisiting a place I went to fifteen years ago and making it 201cjust like the island back home201d and spending most of my time along the beach, laying on sand to catch rays, sipping on cold beer  while watching the waves reach the shoreline .
Chasing sunsets and catching sunrise.
Exchanging travel tales of success and mishaps with wanderlust-stricken friends over one drinks.
 
Making new friends, chitchat over a bottle of the local brew.
Just like a pajama party, before bedtime topics of people, fashion  and on the more personal level, deciphering current relationship status2014 single,  taken or  complicated2014with a good friend met during the EDSA Revolution days.

The taste buds saying hello again to pork , making rice a staple with every meal and coming up with lame excuses to skip the diet.
Cultural immersion also meant seeking out a museum.
It seems that this institution is not a priority in an island destination setting where sun, sea and surf rule.
Maybe because artistry is everywhere in the island2014on every street corner, along the road, in every shop and even the place they2019re staying in2014and the visitors don2019t see the need to see art in an enclosed environment? That makes sense.

Awestruck with the holy places and structures until I got 201ctempled out201d.
Staying to myself, 201cYou don2019t need anything201d, before hitting the market to take photos for a story, but not able to resist buying one item to remember the place by.
I will never learn.
Standing in the center of a club thick with cigarette smoke, my inner self rocking the robot dance to the retro tunes I would pout at in my disco days.
If you must know, my robot dancing is equivalent to the current generation2019s expression of 201cewww201d.
The reason why the music drove the fair-skinned race crazy eludes me.
But 201cwalang basagan ng trip201d and good vibes rule, so be it! Their movie star looks can make up for the way they move on the dance floor.
Walking for kilometers, refusing to hail a cab because the pocket map showed how close the destination was.
Here2019s where the adage 201cit2019s not the destination but the journey201d will hold water, the path showed surprises- good ones.
Getting stuck in heavy traffic while rain is pounding heavily on the vehicle2019s rooftop and nodding to an affirmation as to why I don2019t like the place and love my hometown so much.

It2019s always good to touch base with what yourself and do things you love doing most.
Keep it alive and say 201cjust like old times201d and never let it turn into 201cthose were the days.201d 
*****
For more photos of this event & more lifestyle & travel stories, visit http://apples-and-lemons.blogspot.com/ and http://jeepneyjinggoy.blogspot.com/
Filipinism: What makes art Filipino?  , Filipinism: What makes art Filipino?  Kriztja Marae G.
Labrador, ART works from Filipino artists featured during the recently held art exhibit at the mezzanine of the Royal Mandaya Hotel brought both something familiar and new to the eyes of the audience with its vibrant colors and themes.
  
The exhibit entitled 201cFilipinism: What makes Art Filipino?201d served as a venue to show the talents of our own local artists who are recognized internationally through their distinctly Pinoy art works.

Virgilio Godoy Cuizon, art critic and curator, explain that Filipinism 201cis not a new movement but a way of showing the real identity of artists as Filipinos in their works.201d 201cKung ano ang pinanggalingan mo, ilagay mo sa canvass.
That is your soul, that is Filipinism,201d he said.

The idea started with Cuizon2019s passion in promoting Filipino art and artists which led to the creation of KUNST  Pilipino in 2005 which helps in training aspiring Filipino artists in putting their identity on their art works which are then exhibited to European countries.

He added that other than helping artists, their goal is also to educate people and teach them to appreciate art.

201cWe produce a lot of great artists here, but we only have a few people who are appreciating them and collecting their works,201d he said.

Works from international Filipino artists Aris Bagtas and Emmanuel Nim were featured during the one day event last September 18, wherein other than showcasing their works they also conducted a free workshop and art demonstration.

Aris Bagtas2019 works carries a contemporary form of realism with his works mostly features beautiful vivid colors and metallic luster which mostly pictures about his mother and also familiar subjects like fishermen, the market and flower vendors.
Bagtas is the first Filipino who had exhibited his works at the Museum of the Your Art in Vienna, Austria and also has a number of followers waiting for each art work he releases.

Emmanuel Nim, on the other hand, a self taught artist has also displayed his art works that featured more about countryside scenery in his as he grew-up in the same environment, he is also known for doing on the spot portraits wherein he had a demonstration during the event with the event2019s organizer Teresita D.
Golez as model.

Golez during the opening of the event said that the art exhibit was her way of sharing art to her fellow Dabawenyos.
She first met Bagtas during his art exhibit in Germany.

As the saying goes: 201cKung hindi ka marunong lumingon sa pinaggalingan ay di ka makakarating sa paroroonan201d which translates to 201cIf you do not look back to where you came from, you will not reach where you are going,201d this really pictures out that wherever we go, where we came from will always have an indelible mark in our hearts and to us as a whole.
Supermoon plus eclipse equals rare sky show, Supermoon plus eclipse equals rare sky show
This Sept.
13, 2015 image provided by NASA shows the moon  and the Earth  transiting the sun together, seen from the Solar Dynamics Observatory.
The edge of Earth appears fuzzy because the atmosphere blocks different amounts of light at different altitudes.
This image was taken in extreme ultraviolet wavelengths, invisible to human eyes, but here colorized in gold.
A total lunar eclipse will share the stage with a so-called supermoon Sunday evening, Sept.
27, 2015 as seen from the United States.
That combination hasn't been seen since 1982 and won't happen again until 2033.

CAPE CANAVERAL, Florida -- Get ready for a rare double feature, starring our very own moon.
A total lunar eclipse will share the stage with a so-called supermoon Sunday night or early Monday, depending where you are.
That combination hasn't been seen since 1982 and won't happen again until 2033.
When a full or new moon makes its closest approach to Earth, that's a supermoon.
Although still about 220,000 miles away, this full moon will look bigger and brighter than usual.
In fact, it will be the closest full moon of the year, about 30,000 miles closer than the average distance.

NASA planetary scientist Noah Petro is hoping the celestial event will ignite more interest in the moon.
He is deputy project scientist for the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter, or LRO, which has been studying the moon from lunar orbit since 2009.
"The moon's a dynamic place," Petro said Wednesday.
"We're seeing changes on the surface of the moon from LRO.
We're seeing that it's not this static dead body in the sky ...
it's this great astronomical object that we have in our backyard, essentially.
So people should get out and start looking at it."
Many stargazers, professional and amateur alike, dislike the term "supermoon," noting the visible difference between a moon and supermoon is slight to all but the most faithful observers.
"It's not like the difference between an ordinary man and Superman," said Alan MacRobert, a senior editor at Sky & Telescope magazine.
"It really ought to be called a tiny, slightly little bit bigger moon, rather than the supermoon."
The full eclipse of the moon will last more than an hour and be visible, weather permitting, from North and South America, Europe, Africa and western Asia.
Showtime on the US East Coast is 10:11 p.m.
EDT ; that's when the moon, Earth and sun will be lined up, with Earth's shadow totally obscuring the moon.
In Europe, the action will unfold before dawn Monday.
No matter where, the preshow will begin two hours earlier.
There won't be another total lunar eclipse until 2018.
This eclipse marks the end of a tetrad, or series of four total lunar eclipses set six months apart.
This series began in April 2014.
The 21st century will see eight of these tetrads, an uncommonly good run.
From 1600 to 1900, there were none.
Observatories are marking the celestial event with public telescope viewing, although magnifying devices won't be necessary; the eclipse will be easily visible with the naked eye.
Astronomers are urging stargazers to simply look to the east.
In Los Angeles, Griffith Observatory also will serve up Beethoven's "Moonlight Sonata" on the piano and other moon-themed music.
NASA will provide a live video feed of the entire eclipse 2014 an option in case clouds obscure your own view.

Mazda LausGroup rolls out 2015 collection, Mazda LausGroup rolls out 2015 collectionANGELES CITY -- Mazda LausGroup and Berjaya Auto Philippines rolled out last weekend its showcase of new generation Mazdas, the globally acclaimed SKYACTIV Technology and the innovative KODO design.

Thrilled customers trooped to MarQuee Mall Activity Center to see and feel Mazda2019s 2015 collection featuring the Mazda MX-5 SkyActiv two-seater roadster, the latest generation of the best-selling sports car in the world, tracing back its iconic origin 25 years ago.
Also showcased was the all-new Mazda 2 subcompact car, featuring both sedan and hatchback variants.
The 2015 Japan Car of the Year awardee is the fourth model in Mazda2019s new generation of vehicles.
There was also Mazda 6 SkyActiv.
Award winning in its own class, it is the flagship executive sedan of Mazda which continues to be a stylish and suitable choice to the premium executive category.
Meanwhile, both CX-5 and BT-50 on their respective ways have obviously evolved into a more mature expression of the brand2019s Kodo Soul of Motion design philosophy.
Mazdas are now upgraded with the latest design ideas and new technology like Mazda Connect HMI  system and the most advanced front lighting system in the auto industry2014adaptive LED headlamps technology, lighting that adapts to the driving conditions to provide the optimum front illumination.
201cMazda2019s 2015 collection is certainly for all kinds of car enthusiasts...for bachelors, couples, families, executives, sport buffs, travelers and others,201d said Lisset A.
Laus-Velasco, Executive Director of Mazda LausGroup.
201cThis activity signifies that countryside motoring is globally at par when it comes to our accessibility to such vehicle line ups,201d she said.
201cThose who did not make it this weekend still have a chance to see the all-new Mazdas and learn more about their specs, special features, and lowdown payment rates.
They can still visit Mazda LausGroup2019s dealerships in San Fernando, Pampanga; Tarlac; Cabanatuan; and Dagupan,201d she added.
For more of Mazda, visit the New Mazda Pampanga today along Jose Abad Santos Avenue, City of San Fernando Pampanga or call 0918-854-2711 or log on to www.LausAutoGroup.com.

5 reasons why you should go canyoneering in Alegria, Cebu, 5 reasons why you should go canyoneering in Alegria, Cebu
Canyoneering in Alegria, Cebu 
A ROAD trip south of Cebu is always worth it.
If you leave early in the morning, an entire day for canyoneering should do it, with enough sunlight to spare for the return trip to the metro.

CLICK HERE to read the five reasons why you should go canyoneering in Alegria, Cebu.
Sacrificing for others, Sacrificing for othersKarlo Paolo R.
Pates, TO SACRIFICE one's desire and time for the greater welfare of others is indeed an admirable act of selflessness and love.
This was proven by the story of a person who always tries to find life's true value of happiness be it through his work as a professor and as a family man.
Christopher Ryan B.
Maboloc, 39, a Philosophy professor at the Ateneo de Davao University  and a contributor to a national daily newspaper, emphasized that success should not be the basis of a person's happiness.
"Success will always be a relative term.
If you measure your happiness on the basis of success, then you will soon realize that success is never permanent.
What I find most valuable is the meaningfulness of the things that I do," Maboloc said.
Maboloc, who's been teaching for the last 19 years, explained that each one has that moral obligation which is to try to see the best things in life.
"I always imagine poor children who are not in school and how difficult life is for them.
My task as a teacher is to emphasize to my present students that they carry a moral burden.
We can't change the world but we can do basic things in order to promote the well-being of others," said Maboloc, who's happily married to Marietta Casia-Maboloc and blessed with two kids, Jean Francoise Marie, 15; and Kitt Ludwig Conroy, 12.
Maboloc said that he finds fulfillment from his work as a teacher whenever he gets to draw out the inner gifts of his students.
"The answers of bright students do not really excite me.
It is the answers of the less serious type of students that concern me.
You know, the future depends on people in the margins.
The lives of good students are predictable.
The focus should be on those students who have so much in them and yet don't recognize their gifts," Maboloc said.
 
For him, the role of the professors is to create an environment and atmosphere in which they will be able to contribute meaningfully to the learning process.
There are no difficult courses since all things can be learned but there are difficult people, teachers included, Maboloc said.
"But the most important role that a teacher can play is to be able to point what is wrong with world.
The four walls of the classroom provide an atmosphere not only for learning but for unlearning perverted values.
It is improbable that a course in ethics will change their perspective in life.
But your task in the classroom is to at least tell them the right thing to do," he said.
But for Maboloc, the best life lessons he has taught to most of his students is that life will always triumph over despair.
Maboloc received his Bachelor's degree in Philosophy from  AdDU, his Master's degree in Philosophy from Ateneo de Manila University , and another Master's degree in Applied Ethics from Norwegian University of Science and Technology.
He always makes sure that he always spends majority of his free time with his wife and kids at home.
"I don't usually go out.
I only go out for meetings.
My only vice in life is my crush for Marian Rivera.
Whenever we can, we visit the farm of my father-in-law near Eden in Toril.
Right there, we are transported into a rural setting.
No electricity and just the beauty of nature.
," Maboloc said.
Reading books together is considered as their form of bonding as a family.
For Maboloc, Reading books keep their family together.
He consider it as a form of expanding a child's imagination.
He also admitted that there are similarities of his role as a professor in school and a father at home.
"You have to impart good moral values.
But you can only do that if they see in you what it is that you are preaching," Maboloc said.
NEW BOOK
Just recently, Maboloc also ventured into writing which resulted to the publication of a book he wrote, entitled:"THe Harshest Things You'll Learn About Love."
Maboloc said the book contains poems, short essays, letters, and aphorisms on love, life and philosophy which was inspired and influenced by the style and works of individuals that include Michel Foucault, Friedrich Nietzsche, Ludwig Wittgenstein, Arthur Miller, Gabriel Garcia-Marquez and Pablo Neruda.
"Young adults need to read something that will assure them that love is the only thing that makes life truly beautiful," he said.
The theme behind the publication, according to Maboloc, is based on love.
Maboloc dedicated this book to all young people who believes how beautiful life is when you are in love.
"Young people tend to idealize love.
I believe that they have to realize that true love means being aware of our limits as human beings," he added.
Classic girl cruisin2019, Classic girl cruisin2019
MAGIC.
Rhina Echivarre reveals that every time she gets on stage, everything feels magical.
And the best thing about being a Disney Cruise Line performer? She becomes an inspiration to an endless stream of tiny guests big on dreams.
Deneb R.
Batucan, Rhina Echivarre is on course as she pursues her stage dreams
, WHILE some girls waited for their true love, Rhina Echivarre found hers 2014 at the center stage under a full-on spotlight.
True love manifests in each graceful step when she dances, each note she hits when she sings, and in every character she portrays.
Magic comes to life as she performs on stage.
It is where Rhina sheds her soul and truly lives.
Read more in today's issue of Sun.Star Weekend.

Dabawenyo develops new system to address traffic, Dabawenyo develops new system to address traffic
DAVAO.
Inventor Jose Guardo Jr.
and his team pose with an "approved" sign that indicates their wish to have their project funded and turn into a real one.
From left: UBC Bearing Support, Emeliano Belen Sr.; mechanical and marketing man, Rodrigo Miguel Jr.; inventor Jose Guardo Jr.; mechanical and marketing manager Edward Geguerra, and electronics and electrical man, Jemshyd Mumar.
Christine Joice C.
Cudis, THE world's third magnetic levitation system for transportation, after Germany and Japan, which will be funded by the National Government, can be found in Davao City.
And it is developed by a young Dabawenyo.
Jose Guardo Jr., from Agdao, Davao City, developed the technology, which is already patented in the World Intellectual Property Organization .

"The alarming state of traffic in the country's key cities inspired me to develop this technology," said Guardo.
In the Global Innovation Index , Metro Manila ranks fifth, losing at least P2.5 billion a day from potential businesses due to traffic.
If not mitigated, it can go as high as P6 billion a day.
Guardo and his team believe that the solution developed by their company, the Maglev Vision Corp.
with partners UBC Bearing, AXPB Bearing, and Protean Motors, is a game changer.
The people behind Maglev Vision are as follows: chairman Domingo Penalosa; UBC Bearing Support, Emeliano Belen, Sr.; Mechanical and Marketing man, Rodrigo Miguel Jr.; Inventor Jose Guardo Jr.; mechanical and marketing manager Edward Geguerra; electronics and electrical man Jemshyd Mumar; electronics head Engr.
Dennis Estrella; mechanical man, Engr.
Nonato Bolos; chief technology officer Engr.
Yehuda Ortal; prototype developer, Warren de Castro; prototype developer, Cyrus Dominic Guererro; programs and controls man, Ken Policarpio, and electronics man, Hiocer Sadio.
"The problem calls for an urgent solution that should be invented and built," Guardo said.
The technology used in Germany is room temperature electromagnets, which are magnetically attracted upwards to iron rails positioned under the edges of the guide way structure.
In Japan, they use superconductor, which works through a 270 degrees Celsius temperature, while Guardo's invention works using the gyroscopic spin induced lenz's law.
It uses a permanent magnet that is twisted, then returned to the conductor , and then refilled, causing the train to levitate.
The technology aims to decongest urban population, encourage technological tourism, and spur manufacturing jobs for the Philippines.
At present, the team is looking for investors who can finance the construction of this project.
Recently, they were awarded second place in the Davao Regional Invention and Contest Exhibit of the Department of Science and Technology and Davao Investors Association.
"We joined to introduce this invention to the Filipino community, we are hopeful that we can get investors to fund us," Guardo said.
DOST-Technology Application and Promotion Institute  has expressed willingness in financing their invention.
Incubation center
If the Davao Inventors Association can generate enough fund, they, together with the DOST-TAPI, will push through with the five-hectare incubation center project, which will house several stations which will embody different avenues for inventors and researchers to experiment and build prototypes.
If pursued, there will be a test trail, which is a six-seater prototype of the maglev technology to be constructed in the project to transport the viewers from one station to another.
The center, which will be erected in the Mindanao Science and Technology Centrum, will enable the end products of the investors to be marketed to the investors.
It will not only be the center for children2019s educational tours but it will motivate the other age brackets in the community to find a way to make tangible their ideas.
Regional Invention Contest
This year's Regional Invention and Contest Exhibit  in Davao Region, which was slated last October 1 to 3, 2015, had nearly hundred entries responding to the call of the Department of Science and Technology  to showcase Davao's inventions at NCCC Mall of Davao.
Rice 2015, organized by the Technology Department and Promotion Institute  and the regional office of the Department of Science and Technology , in cooperation with the Davao Inventors Association , will be participated in by the region's inventors, developers, professionals and student researchers.
DOST regional director Anthony C.
Sales said earlier that the contest is aimed at showcasing the potentials of Davao inventors.
"We have a lot of entries of inventions, utility models and other patented intellectual properties to take center stage during the three-day contest," he said.
Rice 2015 carries the theme: "Philippines: A Science Nation Innovating and Inventing for Global Competitiveness."
The event will show the capacity of the Filipino inventors to turn raw materials to innovative finished products.
The contest will have six categories -- Outstanding Invention ; Outstanding Utility Model; Outstanding Industrial Design; Outstanding Creative Research ; Outstanding Student Creative Research  for High School; and Outstanding Student Creative Research  for College students.

Cargo ships that have sunk with fatalities since 2011 , Cargo ships that have sunk with fatalities since 2011 ON MONDAY, the Coast Guard said a US cargo ship carrying 33 people sank.
It disappeared four days earlier, after encountering high winds and heavy seas from Hurricane Joaquin.
One body has been found, and planes and ships are still searching for the rest of the crew.
Here are some past incidents in which cargo ships have sunk:
Jan 3, 2015: Cargo ship Cemfjord, carrying cement from Denmark to England's west coast, capsized north of Scotland and sank in stormy seas without issuing a distress call.
An extensive search failed to find any of the eight-member crew.
Jan 2, 2015: Philippine cargo vessel Bulk Jupiter sank near the coast of Vung Tau City, Vietnam.
One crewman was rescued, two were found dead, and 16 were never found.
May 5, 2014: A Chinese cargo ship with cement sank after colliding with a container ship near Hong Kong.
One crew member of the Zhong Xing 2 was rescued, but 12 were never found.
April 4, 2014: The bodies of two North Korean sailors were recovered after their cargo ship went missing off the southern coast of South Korea.
Three were rescued, but 11 remained missing.
Oct.
15, 2013: Chinese cargo ship the CHENGLU15 sank off South Korea's southeastern coast in strong winds and fierce waves.
Eight people were rescued and nine bodies were recovered, leaving two people missing.
July 4, 2013: Eleven crew members from a Bangladeshi cargo ship went missing after their vessel capsized in rough waters in the Andaman Sea near Thailand.
Six were rescued.
December 5, 2012:  Three people were killed and 10 went missing after cargo ship Volgo Balt 199 sank in a severe storm off Turkey's Black Sea coast.
February 1, 2012: A Cambodian-registered cargo ship sank in a Black Sea storm near Turkey.
Eight of 11 crew members went missing.
November 27, 2011:  Russian cargo ship Swanland sank off Bardsey in the Irish Sea after it was hit by a freak wave in gale force winds.
Two crew members were saved, but six died.
UAGS wins cultural dance tilt, UAGS wins cultural dance tiltCITY OF SAN FERNANDO -- The UA Grade School  dominated the Cultural Dance Competition in the Association of Archdiocesan Schools of Pampanga  Meet.
The representatives of the UAGS were declared champions in the pre-school and Grades 1 and 2 levels, beating the other 12 contenders in each level.
The competition was held at SM City Pampanga on September 17, 2015.
UA studes bag 2018Rolyo ng Malaya 32019, UA studes bag 2018Rolyo ng Malaya 32019CITY OF SAN FERNANDO -- Berlin Guanlao, Armand Sotto and Geancarlo Cortez of the University of the Assumption  College of Engineering and Architecture  won the grand prize in the Rolyo ng Malaya 3: An Inter-school Amateur Documentary and Film Festival .
Rolyo ng Malaya is a project of the United Architects of the Philippines - Manila Architects for Government Service .
Guanlao, Sotto and Cortez also won the Best Documentary Poster, Best Documentary Host and Best Documentary Film.
The theme of the competition is "Bahay na Bitin: Batas Pambansa 220  compliance with Batas Pambansa 344".
Former winners were Technological Institute of the Philippines - Manila  and University of the East - Caloocan .

HAU entry named Best World Film in New York, HAU entry named Best World Film in New York"ARI: My Life With A King," produced by Holy Angel University, won the Best World Film award in the recent Harlem International Film Festival held in New York City.
The award represents the top recognition among the foreign films submitted to the festival, second only to the Best Film Award which is given to the US entries.
The award came just after the HAU film was accepted as official selection in the Vancouver International Film Festival in Canada and shortly before announcement of its acceptance as lone Filipino entry to the Chicago International Film Festival.

The two are among the biggest film festivals in North America, with Chicago recognized as the oldest in the United States.
The Chicago festival calls the HAU film "a celebration of a vibrant culture's poetic legacy that pulses with local color."
Directed by HAU student Carlo Enciso Catu and produced by HAU alumnus Ferdinand Lapuz, the Kapampangan-language film is the first filmmaking attempt of the University.
According to HAU senior administrator Robby Tantingco, the University previously funded Brillante Mendoza2019s early film "Manoro" which eventually won at the Cinemanila and Torino  International Film Festivals.
"Ari: My Life With A King" is the first film with HAU students, employees and alumni in the cast and crew, Tantingco said.
The film is a coming-of-age story of a Kapampangan boy who refuses to speak in Kapampangan until he meets the so-called King of Kapampangan Poets.
Ronwaldo Martin, brother of popular actor Coco Martin, plays the boy's part with real-life Kapampangan poet laureate Francisco Guinto in the king's role.
The film is part of the University's advocacy to promote local culture through its Center for Kapampangan Studies.
Last year, the University2019s two entries to the Animahenasyon, a national competition for animated films, both won first prize in their respective categories.
Lapuz, recipient of the University's outstanding alumnus award last year, arranged the film2019s participation in the international festivals, which he also does for all the Filipino films that deserve international attention if not recognition.
Early this year, Lapuz donated P250,000.00 to the University2019s scholarship program.
The amount represented the proceeds from the screening of the award-winning films he recently produced, including Vilma Santos' "Ekstra," Nora Aunor's "Dementia" and "Bwakaw," a Philippine entry to the Oscar Awards.
"Ari: My Life With A King" will be shown to various schools in Pampanga and HAU alumni and Kapampangan groups in the US and the Middle East as part of the University2019s scholarship fund-raising campaign, according to Tantingco.
 
Malayan tribe ACTEC 2015 sportsfest overall champ , Malayan tribe ACTEC 2015 sportsfest overall champ APALIT -- The Malayan tribe was declared the overall champion of Asian Caregiving and Technology Education Center2019s 2015 sportsfest.
The five-day sportsfest was held last week from Monday to Friday at Barangay Sampaloc Covered Court where around 300 students and some faculty members participated.
Jem Manzanillo, events coordinator, said that indoor and outdoor games and dance competitions were some of the activities in the sportsfest.
He added that the tribes Banilan, Alamid, Mawmag, Soasoa and Malayan which were named after the animals that were discovered from the Philippines.
"Balilan is from the family of whales, Alamid came from the family of cats, Mawmag came from the family of tarsier, Soasoa came from the family of lizards and the Malayan animal is also called an ant eater," he said.
Manzanillo said the animals mentioned were discovered from the Philippines and they want to introduce them to the students.
"We wanted to emphasize patriotism," he said.
According to Manzanillo, Malayan won the table tennis double division and boys division, and volleyball boys division.

Balilan, however, won the cheerdance competition, basketball and table tennis for female division.
He added that Mawmag won the volleyball girls division, scrabble, games of the general, Soasoa won the chess game while Alamid won the streetdance competition.
Mazda: Soul in Motion , Mazda: Soul in Motion MAZDA Laus Group and Berjaya Auto Philippines is showcasing new generation Mazdas, the globally acclaimed SKYACTIV Technology and the innovative KODO design embodied in its 201cSoul in Motion201d philosophy.

The Mazda 2015 collection features the Mazda MX-5 SkyActiv two-seater roadster, the latest generation of the best-selling sports car in the world, tracing back its iconic origin 25 years ago.
Also in the fleet is the all-new Mazda 2 subcompact, in both sedan and hatchback variants.
The 2015 Japan Car of the Year is the fourth model in Mazda2019s new generation of vehicles.
Then there is Mazda 6 SkyActiv.
Award winning in its own class, it is the flagship executive sedan of Mazda which continues to be a stylish and suitable choice to the premium executive category.
The CX-5 and BT-50 have both evolved into a more mature expression of the brand2019s Kodo Soul of Motion design philosophy.
Mazdas are now upgraded with the latest design ideas and new technology like Mazda Connect HMI  system and the most advanced front lighting system in the auto industry2014adaptive LED headlamps technology, lighting that adapts to the driving conditions to provide optimum front illumination.
The Mazda 2015 collection is certainly for all kinds of car enthusiasts who want striking specifications, special features, coupled with lowdown payment rates and backed up by excellent service for that exceptional drive.---JTD/PS De Leon
For more of Mazda, visit the New Mazda Pampanga today along Jose Abad Santos Avenue, City of San Fernando Pampanga or call 0918-854-2711 or log on to www.LausAutoGroup.com.
First lady pilot of Vietnamese airline is a Filipino, First lady pilot of Vietnamese airline is a FilipinoFILIPINO pilot Captain Antonette Ortiz Parocha has made history by being the first female co-pilot of Vietnam2019s privately-owned new-age airline, Viet Jet Air , airport authorities said on Thursday.
The Civil Aviation Authority of the Philippines  said that Parocha paid a courtersy call to CAAP director general William Hotchkiss III on Thursday after submitting her application for Airline Transport Pilot License .
This, CAAP said, is a requirement before taking the ATPL, or the highest-level pilot license that allows the license holder to fly professionally as a pilot in command of multi-crew aircraft with any commercial airline company.
Certified pilot licenses are categorized under four classes: Student Pilot license , Private Pilot License , Commercial Pilot License , and Airline Transport Pilot License , CAAP noted.
Parocha, has logged over 5,000 flying hours.
The minimum requirement is to accumulate 1,500 flying hours.
A native of Cantilan, Surigao del Sur, Parocha graduated from Patts Collage of Aeronautics in 2001 and Flight School International in 2005.
She meanwhile expressed hope that she will pass the exam she will take this month and soon become a commercial pilot.

The heart of a soldier , The heart of a soldier Rhona Goc-ong-Villariasa, HE HAS been serving in the military for twelve years now.
He has suffered being away from his family as all soldiers have to, just to protect the country.
 
Is it not an easy task, but because of his big love for his profession Capt.
Mario Atendido Tena, the Operations Officer of Task Force Davao , faces these challenges with great confidence.
Capt.
Tena was born on September on 15, 1974 in Quezon Province.

The youngest of eight siblings, he is the only one who's with the military, a job he did not plan for.

"Since 1993 nag-college ako, nag-ROTC ako hanggang sa naging ROTC Officer ako dire-diretso na yun hanggang sa na-commission ako as reservist officer, nag-graduate ako sa advance officer course, sa provisionary, then na-commission ako ng 2001.
So lahat ng natutunan ko sa military nakuha ko sa ROTC," Capt.
Tena said in an interview.

He first took upp Civil Engineering Technology at the Technological University of the Philippines, but he decided to shift to another course and got a Bachelor in Technical Teaching Education, which he finished in 2001.
Before he became a soldier, he was a teacher first.
 
He also tried working in a construction firm where he was involved in testing materials.
 
But, apparently, being a soldier is his fate.
When he finished his preparatory course in the Officer Candidate School, Davao City was his first assignment.

"Palipat-lipat lang ako till nakarating dito, naging platoon leader, company commander, nag S3 pa ako, hanggang sa naibigay sa akin itong posisyon ko ngayon," he said.

He also had his sting in the battlefield, admitting that he lived years of fearing for his life.
 
"Nung mga lieutenant days ko halos puro operations kami sa Paquibato District.
Madaling araw, minsan dis-oras ng gabi lumalakad ka, walang tulog, lahat ng damit mo basang-basa tapos minsan di ka na nagpapalit ng damit.
Di na nga namin nararamdaman na ang baho-baho namin.
Minsan tumutulo na ang luha mo, natatanong mo ang sarili mo ano ba 2018tong pinasok ko," he said.

He admits sacrificing his time for the family whenever work demands.

Still he tries to give his best as a husband and a father to his eight-year-old son.
"Yung trabaho namin na 24/7.
Pag nakabakasyon ka on-call ka naman.
Mula ng pumasok ako ng sundalo hindi na talaga ako nakapagbakasyon na talagang bakasyon.
Nasanay ako sa mga previous commanders ko na kahit nakabakasyon kana open mo pa rin yung cellphones mo kasi on call ka pa rin, kaya minsan nag-aaway kami ng asawa ko.
Pero yung responsbilty din kasi," the officer, who is also the Chief Officer of Task Force Agila, said.

There2019s still a lot he intends to do while in service.
 "Siguro makaabot lang ako ng 20 years sa service okay na ako.
Napaka-challenging maging isang sundalo at marami akong natutunan.
By the time nga magreretiro na ako una talaga is babawi ako sa pamilya ko.
Simpleng buhay lang, di ko naman aim na yumaman o ano, basta you survive lang, okay na sa akin," he said.

Capt.
Tena is often described by his men as strict, but he brushes this off saying he is just doing his job.
 He encourages his men to give their all and serve with their heart to maintain the dignity and respect on soldiers.
 
"Mahalin nila yung trabaho nila.
Di mo naman papasukin yung isang trabaho na di mo gusto.
Andiyan kana sa mundong yan patunayan mo ang sarili mo, di lang yungginagawang compliance, ipakita mo yung best mo sa lahat ng ginagawa mo," he said.

Vispop Music Festival keeps the Bisdak spirit alive, Vispop Music Festival keeps the Bisdak spirit alive
Hope Tinambacan goes live with his original "Tug ta Tug," a Vispop finalist that has been making waves in airplay.

MY FEET were ready to jump along the music.
But what welcomed my shoes at the very first Vispop Music Festival were raindrops and mud.
Nevertheless, I was surprised by myself when the one-night event had me diving into the dirt.
Held at the University of the Philippines Cebu, the biggest Visayan music festival gathered homegrown talents last September 13, 2015 to celebrate purely local music and culture.
 
Big winners from the Vispop competition, which started in 2013, together with veterans from the Bisaya music scene, fed my soul with their melodies of romance, heartbreak and varying themes of life2019s daily endeavors.
 My midnight jam 201cDuyog201d -- Vispop 1.0 champ and a constant radio favorite -- was brought to life by Cebuana music stalwart Anna Fegi.
Nostalgic memories came flashing back when Aggressive Audio brought the house down with its Liar Evil,201d a Bisrock  legend I got to hear only on the radio in my childhood years.
Apart from the great lineup of bands and singers, the night was also made magical when award-winning Bisaya poets Shane Carreon and Jona Bering took centerstage with their romantic works of poetry that had me remembering an unrequited love while couples at the back exchanged giggles.
Of course, a festival can never be complete without me treating my tummy a couple of cravings.
Among the food I have enjoyed were sisig and mango-flavored taho, which made good company while I watched Abra-evoking wordsmiths battling in a Bisaya-spirited fliptop session.
But what really had me in deep attachment to the event was the fact that I got to celebrate the night with the people who share with me the same culture I2019ve grown up with.
How lovely it is to bond with people who speak the same language with you and swap jokes only Bisayas can understand.
Indeed, the mud caused by the rain was as significant as the event.
The mud reminded me of something that is rooted from the ground.
Something that is homegrown.
And that is what Vispop is trying to get across -- to serve as a reminder for us Bisayas to never forget how colorful our homegrown Bisaya culture is.
The Vispop Music Festival may be too young -- with only its first run to show.
Nevertheless, it has already made a giant leap in keeping the Bisaya spirit alive amid this fast-paced world.

The state of the toilet 2015, The state of the toilet 2015
Residents of Isla Verde rely on the sea for a lot of things; as their source of livelihood and as their open defecation area.

Rhealyn C.
Pojas, IN A visit at Barangay 23-C in Isla Verde, Sun.Star Davao was able to converse among the residents living in the coastal area.
The houses are built on stilts to allow the rise and ebb of tide, and more...
Open
Leticia Guzman, a 65-year-old resident in Isla Verde said that there were already three Barangay Captains since she resided there, not one has fulfilled the promise of a public toilet accessible for all.
She has been living at Isla Verde since 1978 and never had the luxury of a sanitary toilet in her house.
They cannot afford one.
Most of their earnings are spent on the basics - food.
"Of course, we would prioritize food over the comfort room," Guzman said, adding that among the members of the family, it is only her who is earning an income by purchasing clothes in Uyanguren and selling it in Bankerohan for a higher price.
The highest she earns is P800 gross.
"Only those who have a bungalow house in the area have access to proper toilets," Guzman said.
Guzman said that when they defecate or pee, they would use an "arinola" the contents of which they would later throw to the sea.
Others do their thing in a plastic bag and throw this to the sea as well.
They are aware that it has negative effects on them especially when it comes to their health.
But Guzman said that is a reality.
A daily run
Imagine yourself ready to go but have to run to where you can do it.
Jeanie Fe Grace T.
Sangkula, 38, is another resident of Isla Verde who shared similar stories as Guzman, including the lack of money to build a toilet.
When asked what they do when there is an urgent call of nature, Sangkula said that if it is daytime they would use a public toilet at the other side of the coast where they would pay P2 for every use.
It is a kilometer away from where they are so if they could no longer hold it, they'd just go to the sea.
"The CR is too far from here," Sangkula's husband voiced out.
They have just been there three months after the last house they were renting collapsed from disrepair.
There is a multipurpose comfort room built by government where they live now but this is locked.
"Maybe because there is no water that is why they do not let people use the multipurpose CR," Sangkula said in the vernacular.
Her husband is a police volunteer under the Davao City Police Office-Unified Force Multiplier .
He doesn't get any income from this work.
Sangkula works twice to thrice a week at Lovely Boneless Bangus.
They earn barely enough to feed their family with six children, four of whom are in school.
Sangkula said that she could earn P750 if she works three days a week, but she could not work more days because she has her small children to attend to.
"My husband's job is not also permanent since it is a voluntary work," she said.
Hosing off
There's open defecation, there's throwing plastics to the sea, and then there's hosing it off.
That's what they do.
But don't be deceived by those that have toilet bowls.
These, too, lead directly to the sea via plastic hoses buried in the ground.
Sangkula showed to Sun.Star Davao some of this hoses which she is referring to.
"At night, the air emits a foul smell since it is mostly during that time when people would dispose their wastes to the sea through the hoses and others," Sangkula said.
Different garbage composed of plastics, cellophanes, and sometimes even feces flattened in the sand decorated the shores.
"One of our concerns is the garbage thrown by the residents to the sea which is hurled by the large waves back to the shore so for us who lived near the coast, it is quiet a struggle," Sangkula said.
How much?
Residents say they can't afford one.
How expensive then is a toilet? 
Sanitation Inspector Curtis Lazarraga said that with just P3,000 to P4,000, a person can already build their own CR.
But P3,000 is not money these people can easily come by.
According to Lazarraga, there is an estimated P300,000 people living on the shoreline and riverbanks of Davao City.
 
When asked about the clamor of the people to ask the government to put up a public toilet in Isla Verde, Lazarraga said that the real concern is really moving the people out of the bayside.
"If they can be relocated they can be in a more appropriate area where they can put up their own individual toilets because according to the law, you cannot put up a house without a toilet.
It is your responsibility," Lazarraga added.
It is not also advisable to put up a toilet in the coastal area because it will still result into sea contamination especially when the water flooded the toilets during high tide, Lazarraga explained.
Though the government had already provided solutions to the problem, they cannot compel the people to relocate due to the economic downside of it.

The people living in Isla Verde are informal settlers and are financially challenged, Lazaragga explained.
The government cannot impose on the people to relocate because there is no readily available space for them except in Paquibato which the people themselves do not like and that is another problem, Lazaragga admitted.

Informal settlers in Isla Verde are mostly of the Sama tribe, whose lives have always been connected to the sea.
The government does not also encourage putting up a communal toilet because sustainability cannot be attained through it and it often causes quarrels among the families living in the area in the issue of maintaining cleanliness.
Living on the bayside is discouraged, but these people would not have any other area to live.
Government, too, does not have an appropriate relocation site for them.
Thus, they stay.
Government cannot act.
The sea remains the communal toilet of hundreds of thousands.
The clean and the unclean  , The clean and the unclean  Christine Joice C.
Cudis, DABAWENYOS brag about our drinking water being among the second best in the world.

However, having the best does not translate to having enough.
Due to the growing population and rapid urbanization of the city, the demand of water supply has dramatically increased.

Being the third largest urban area in the country and the economic center of southern Philippines, Davao City is home to 1,612,100 people.

By 2014, the demand of the water supply per year is equivalent to 98,149,311 cubic meters which the 57 production wells of Davao City Water District  wasstil able to supply sufficiently.
 
But by 2019, the water demand is expected to elevate up to 117,265,313 cubic meters, which will require additional 10 production wells.
 
In 2025, it will go high to 141,101,904 cubic meters; in 2030, it will be 164,392,803 cubic meters which calls for the need to provide at least 94 production wells.

At the time, DCWD serves 61% of the city's population which translates to 108 barangays who have access to potable water out of the 182 total number of barangays here.
Of the total potable water extracted, 99.3% of the production were sourced from groundwater, only .70% were from their spring source in Malagos.
 
Groundwater although renewable, is a finite resource.
And being groundwater dependent is power intensive, in fact, the impact of groundwater over-extraction in the national map can already be obseved.
In the case of Cebu and Manila, wherein brackish water have intruded into the aquifers of Cebu and a huge portion of Metro Manila sunk due to over extraction of groundwater.
 
Due to excessive use of groundwater, Manila bay has risen by 1 meter from 1964 to 2002, an effect attributed to subsidence.
Levelling data from National Mapping and Resource Information Authority  reveal that areas in Metro Manila sank 0.68 meters to 1.43 meters in 30 years .

Thus, in 2008, National Water Resource Board  issued a memoratorium of the issuance of water permits, a regulation prohibiting extraction of water from deep wells as groundwater condition in Metro Manila has become extremely critical.

To not suffer the same fate with Cebu and Manila, DCWD in partnership with the Apo Agua Infrastractura Inc.
 proposed the Davao City Bulk Water Supply Project.
 
Land subsidence is among the negative effects of groundwater over-extraction, if continued, it will result to damage to highways, buildings, wells, and pipelines.

If groundwater level falls, the existing wells need to be drilled deeper, new wells need to be drilled, or an alternative source of water must be located.

The worse that could happen from over extraction is salt water intrusion in the water pipelines, a clear threat to fresh groundwater.
All of the water in the ground is not fresh; most in the deeper area, below the ocean is saline.
 
The boundary between the freshwater and salt water is called brackish water.

Naturally, it will be stable until over extraction which will lead to migration, or intrusion of salt water into freshwater aquifers.

Once salt mixes with freshwater, either treating the water or locating and developing an alternative water supply are only options, however costly.
 Septage and Sewerage Same goes with the issue of septage and sewerage.

Today, there is an estimate of 300,000 population living along the river banks and coastal areas of the city.
Large number of population means large responsibility.
 
City Health Office monitors the excavation of septic tanks in the city's households with an interval of three to five years.
The problem is out of the 11 septic tank excavators who applied for accrediation, only three of them passed: Aquino septic tanks and plumbing services; Hardcore septic tank excavators; and Surop septic tank excavators.

This means that only three excavators operate legally for all the household in the city.
Which will not cater to all, especially through time where the population is expected to increase.

With this, the city, in accordance to the clean water act of the Philippines, must take responsibility.
A memorandum of agreement between the city council and DCWD was signed in 2014, instituting for the establishment of a P200 million septage treatment facility.

Unfortunately, the completion of the project is delayed due to the 'not approved' condition given by the city council for the second MOA passed by DCWD stating that they should be the exclusive provider of the facility.
City administrator Atty.
Melchor Quitain said in an interview, "because there will be a monopoly if DCWD will hold exclusive provision for the project." 
The presence of E.coli bacteria has been found out to have increased in the Davao river where the wastewater from household, establishments, and other factories are confluent.
And just like the rest, if not addressed, the level of bacteria will continue to rise.

"The city council will have to hasten the implementation of this ordinance," said City Health Office  Sanitary Inspector, Curtis C.
Lazarraga.

Davao City is blessed with water sources that can still provide for its people, but this will not be so if we continue to disregard its value and treat water as if the supply will never run out.
 
Now, we have the ground water source that will soon be complemented by surface water.

The population grows, the people are not mindful about their wastewater; they pollute the ground and waterways with their sewage and use their clean water for washing.

How is the septage law? , How is the septage law? Kriztja Marae G.
Labrador, CRAFTED back in 2010 and with its Implementing Rules and Regulation  signed back in 2013, Davao City2019s Septage and Sewerage Management Ordinance of the City has come a long way.

However, after almost two years since the release of its IRR, the said ordinance has not yet been fully implemented in the City.

Data from the City Health Office  - Environment Sanitation Division showed that as of 2014, there are a total of 10,058 households in the city without toilet and 25,643 households with insanitary toilet out of the 322, 419 households in the city.

Most of the households found with no toilets and insanitary ones are from District 3 wherein Toril had 2,085 households without toilet and Marilog had 3,858 households with insanitary toilets.

Based on the IRR of the City2019s Septage and Sewerage Management Ordinance, 201call building plans for residential, commercial and industrial, including those for apartelles and condominiums, before it is approved by the City Engineer2019s Office, shall conform to the design of the sanitary plumbing and septic tanks specifications.201d The specifications included in the IRR states that the septic tanks shall be built of solid durable material, shall be watertight and shall conform to the applicable Philippine materials standards.

The IRR also required for the septic tanks not to be constructed under any building and not within 25 meters from any existing source of water supply.

It also stated that existing septic tanks that cannot be repaired or upgraded shall be dislodged within one year from the affectivity of the ordinance, which was back way back in 2013 when its IRR was approved.
All septic tanks are required to be dislodged by an accredited mobile service provider every five years or when the sludge volume is already one half of the total capacity of the septic tank, or when the septic tank becomes ineffective.
Also stated under the IRR, the City through its barangay unit, may construct communal toilets and/or septic tanks in areas where informal settlers cannot afford to build.
The barangay will be responsible for the maintenance of the toilets and/or septic tanks but the community shall pay for its usage.
For the construction, the City Government will bear the cost through its annual appropriation for the implementation of the IRR.

Under the Section 22, Rule 9 of the IRR, a septage and sewerage and sewage treatment plant/facility shall be established by the City Government or by an accredited service provider.

The purpose of the facility will be for the unloading of the sludge for a certain fee and treatment by Department of Health approved individuals and companies.

The IRR stated that the facility shall be established pursuant to the memorandum of agreement between the City Government of Davao and the Davao City Water District wherein the city government shall provide an appropriate land which shall serve as the site for the septage, sewerage and sewage treatment facility.

Anyone who violates the provisions shall be fined not less than P1,000 but not more than P2,000 for first offense; second offense has a fine of less than P2,000 but not more than P3,000; and for third and succeeding offenses shall be fined no less than P3,000 but not more than P5,000 and imprisonment of not less than one month but not more than six months.

It was previously reported that the Davao City Council Committee on Environment chairperson Councilor Leonardo R.
Avila III has been requesting for the for the full implementation of the Septage and Sewerage Management Ordinance due to the findings of the rise in the coliform level found in some of the city's rivers due to human and animal wastes, houses located near the river, poultry and hog farms disposing their wastes in the river, and the city not having sewerage/septage treatment facility.

Based on the 2014 water quality assessment of the Environmental Management Bureau, total coliform found for both downstream and upstream of Davao River was estimated at 4,900 to 1,887,000 most probable number  per 100 ml wherein the standard level should only be 1,000mpn per 100 ml.

With a downstream standard level of 200mpn per 100 ml, fecal coliform in Davao River was estimated at 9,600 to 293,000mpn per 100 ml while for the upstream, with a standard level of 100mpn per 100 ml, it was found with 1,700 to 8,700mpn/100 ml of fecal coliform.

Talomo River was found with a total number of 1,006 to 456,000 MPN per 100 ml with around 414 to 183,000mpn per 100 ml of fecal coliform.
The report showed that the rise in the coliform level was due to human and animal wastes, houses located near the river, poultry and hog farms disposing their wastes in the river, and the City not having sewerage/septage treatment facility.

Two years hence, the situation could be worse now as no proper implementation has been commenced.
So, what septic tank design is standard? , So, what septic tank design is standard? Ruji Peter S.
Abat, AS IF having functional septic tanks are not problems enough, by virtue of the Davao City Ordinance No.
0363-10 Series of 2010 otherwise known as Septage and sewerage management ordinance of Davao City, households and establishments are now required to install a three-chamber septic tank instead of the standard two-chamber tanks of before.
 
The Design
Unlike the two-chamber design where the bottom of the tank is layered with gravel to separate the sludge from the water, the three-chamber design has a sealed bottom.
Other than the sealed bottom, the three-chamber septic tank has two leaching chambers that dispose the wastewater from the septic tank.
In the specifications cited in the ordinance, septic tanks should have a 50 millimeter-diameter inlet where wastes from the toilets pass through that then leads to the first chamber called the digestive chamber.

The digestive chamber should have at least one half to two thirds of the entire tanks volume while the next two chambers may have equal dimensions.

There should also be maintenance holes or manholes in each of the chamber for easier access in case there is a need to remove the sludge from the septic tank.
Sought out to describe the difference, Assistant City Building Official lawyer Joseph Felizarta told Sun.Star Davao in an interview that there is no significant difference between the two-chamber to the three-chamber septic tank.

But he was quick to add that somehow, having three-chamber septic tanks with sealed bottoms can come in handy for households that are using water from deep wells since this will be a protection against contaminations from human wastes being absorbed by the soil.
Felizarta also assured that no septic tank will be allowed to be built near underground water resources or watersheds as mandated by the ordinance.
 
Conflict of Law
Felizarta said that the septic tank design being followed by the ordinance is compliant with the Department of Health  guidelines.

Yet as cited Plumbing Code of the Philippines, residents and establishment owners are only required to have two-chamber septic tanks.

"The national law has more weight so basically for us, we just have to implement the building of three-chamber of septic tanks in our own discretion since we also cannot disregard the national law," Felizarta said.
He said in some areas especially those in the dry areas in the city or uplands they don't require residents or establishment owners to build three-chamber septic tanks.

But for those near bodies of water like coastal areas and riversides, they are required to do so.
Households and establishment owners should also have their septic tanks desludged every after three to five years since failure to do so may mean penalties ranging from P1,000 to P5,000 and imprisonment for not more than six months.

"We give more focus on establishing cluster or communal three-chamber septic tanks in slum areas so that we could minimize the pollution.
Since they are informal settlers, most of them don't have septic tanks.
So might as well build a large septic tank that could catch the wastes from households in a particular slum area," Felizarta said.

The budget for the communal septic tanks, however, is reliant on the appropriation of the City Government.

Best Solution
Felizarta, however, described the use of the three-chamber septic tank as a very small contribution to the overall implementation of the law since the best solution is the establishment of a sewerage system and a water treatment facility.

"The ordinance's focus is really the sewerage system and the treatment facility because whether we use a two-chamber or three-chamber septic tank, we still need to treat the wastewater.
That is why we should develop a sewerage system that could catch the wastewater from the septic tanks and take the waste to the treatment facility," Felizarta said.

He estimated that the cost of building the sewers and the treatment facility would be around P100-million.

But after five years since the implementation of the law, the project hasn't started yet since there is no budget to begin with.

The City Health Office's Environment Sanitation Section is the lead implementing agency for the ordinance while the Davao City Water District is tasked to construct the water treatment facility as prescribed by the law.

In the meantime, with the shrinking sizes of residential lots, there is not enough space for three-chambered tanks.
Desludging yet polluting , Desludging yet polluting Karina V.
Canedo, TWO years after the release of the implementing rules and regulations  of the septage and sewerage management program and management of Davao sewage is still being released to the environment untreated.

The IRR of the Septage and Sewerage Management Ordinance of Davao City was released in 2013.
 
Septage or the combination of scum, sludge, and liquid that accumulates in septic tanks that are not disposed properly when these are extracted defeats the purpose of septic tanks.
This is also a major contributor of E.
coli and fecal coliform in major river systems.
 
Based on the Water Quality Assessment of Davao River, total coliform for both downstream and upstream of the river are 4,900-1,887,000 most probable number  /100 ml, while the standard is 1,000 mpn/1000ml.

With a downstream standard level of 200mpn per 100 ml, fecal coliform in Davao River was estimated at 9,600 to 293,000mpn per 100 ml while for the upstream, with a standard level of 100mpn per 100 ml, it was found with 1,700 to 8,700mpn/100 ml of fecal coliform.

Coliform may be considered indigenous in waters but fecal coliform is another thing because it can only be attributed to human and animal wastes.
The identified Water Quality Assessment Area Stations 1-4a which are considered as downstream waters includes the mouth of Davao River, below the Bolton Bridge, Marfori Heights Purok 17, Barangay 5-A, Quarry Area at Purok 8, Barangay 19-B Bacaca, San Rafael Bridge, Purok 9-A, Barangay Ma-a, River Walk, Crocodile Park, Barangay Ma-a, Davao River, Diversion Bridge Ma-a, and Waan Bridge, Purok 5, Barangay Waan.

Talomo River was found with a total number of 1,006 to 456,000 MPN per 100 ml with around 414 to 183,000mpn per 100 ml of fecal coliform.

This rise in the coliform level is due to human and animal wastes, houses located near the river, poultry and hog farms disposing their wastes in the river, and the City not having sewerage/septage treatment facility.
This problem reported last year remains.
 
According to City Health Office Sanitary Inspector II Curtis Lazarraga, one of the most prevailing reasons for these are the fly by night desludgers who provide immediate service for households.
Lazarraga said that there are a total of 11 septic tank excavators within the city but only three have secured disposal facilities for the sludge extracted.

In their list, only the Aquino Septic Tank Excavator and Plumbing Services with its disposal site in Magtuod, the Hardcore Septic Tank Excavator with its disposal site located is in the Mudiang, Bunawan District, and Surop Septic Tank Excavator and Plumbing Services and its disposal site is located at Tacunan, Tugbok are the accredited excavators.

Unaccredited excavators do not have the facilities to dispose and treat the sludge.
Many operate in the dark of the night to pour out the sludge in open areas, canals, estuaries, and even on the beach.
If the Septage and Sewerage Management Ordinance of Davao City is fully implemented, Rule XV of the ordinance, improper sludge disposal belongs to the prohibited acts and omissions and a first violation will be penalized with not less than 1,000 but not more than P2,000, at the discretion of the court.

The second offense will be a fine of not less than P2,000 but not more than 3,000 at the discretion of the court and the third and succeeding offenses fine of not less than 3,000 but not more than 5,000 and the imprisonment of not less than one month but not more than six  months year.

Apart from the illegal excavators that dispose of the sludge directly to waterway, some barangays in Davao City still have no toilets.
Based on records of the City Health Office in the year 2014, in the 322, 419 households in Davao, or 10, 058 or 3.12% have no toilets, 25, 643 or 7.
95 % have insanitary toilets and 286,718 or 88.
32% have sanitary toilets.
 
Out of 10, 058 households without toilets, Toril got the highest number with 2,085, succeeded by Paquibato with 1,194, then Tugbok with 1,098, then Bunawan with 1,045, and Talomo North with 761.
City Health Officer Dr.
Josephine J.
Villafuerte said that Sanitary Inspectors do constant monitoring on coastal areas and are reminding households without toilets to put up one.

Villafuerte also said that they put up toilets if requested by the community but the maintenance will be a collaboration between the community using the toilet and the barangay.
 
But, Lazarraga said that communal toilets stated by the Implementing Rules and Regulations of the Septage and Sewerage Management Ordinance of Davao City is ill-advised especially in coastal barangays because there will be the tendency of the community not being concerned about the facility since this is for everybody.
 
She insists that the real solution is in relocating sea- and riverside residents; a solution that cannot be acted on given the enormity of the problem.
All these, however, would have been alleviated had the city invested on the septage and sewerage facility that the ordinance provides for.

A septage treatment facility is a facility which receives septage or the liquid sludge periodically removed from individual septic tanks and thereafter separates the solids and the liquids and treats the liquids and solids, and presses the solids into a sludge 201ccake201d that is transported for disposal.

The treated sludge which qualifies as biosolids, may be utilized as soil conditioner and for other beneficial use.
This Septage and Sewerage and Sewage Treatment Plant/Facility is where the sludge will be unloaded for a fee provided by the IRR.
The treatment of sludge must be done by any DOH-accredited individuals, companies, whether public, in any DOH-approved treatment facility.
 
The establishment as mandated by the IRR shall be pursuant of the Memorandum of Agreement entered into by and between the City Government of Davao and the Davao City Water District  in accordance with the Section 28 of PD and Section 8 of RA 9275.

Based on the IRR in 2013 the city government shall provide an appropriate land which shall serve as the site of the septage and sewerage and sewage treatment plant and facility.

Its construction, however, was bogged down by a confusion of who really has the responsibility in managing this facility.
Is it the local government or the Davao City Water District, who has the mandate of providing sewerage systems as well.
 
Pollution Control and Safety Officer of the DCWD John Baynosa also bared that the cause of the delay of the implementation of the facility is because of confusion on some responsibilities.

201cWe are confused before who will really be in-charge of Septage facility, if it2019s the Local Government Unit or them, but then it was clarified that it was DCWDs responsibility201d Baynosa said.

This was also confirmed in a separate interview with Lazarraga saying that the finding of lot then has been transferred to the DCWD.

201cDili explicitly stated in the ordinance that they would be the exclusive persons in authority, but in the Implementing Rules and Regulations ang nabutang was it was DCWD which garnered opinions of the council.
201d Lazarraga said.

Lazarraga said that a Memorandum of Agreement  is now crafted between the Davao City and the DCWD to put up the treatment facility.

201cIt2019s already being processed now and we are seeing light in the end of the tunnel,201d Lazarraga said.
Meanwhile in the end of the DCWD, Baynosa said that they only need the MOA to start the project is needed for the DCWD to operate and make the facility.
He said that once it would be signed preliminary activities such as information dissemination about the importance of a septage treatment plant.
In the meantime, it2019s all talk.
Celebrating Iloilo2019s heritage online with Google, Celebrating Iloilo2019s heritage online with Google
UPV Main Building   by CWVS Collection, University of the Philippines - Center for West Visayan Studies 
Iloilo heritage joins Google Cultural Institute collection
, MANILA -- Google has collaborated with the University of the Philippines  Western Visayas to launch Iloilo2019s rich collection of heritage structures on Google Cultural Institute, an online platform that helps to make the world2019s culture accessible and available to anyone.
The collection shows off Iloilo2019s rich cultural backdrop, dating back from the pre-colonial period up to the 20th century.
201cThis collection is set to make Iloilo join the growing list of historic cities featured on the Cultural Institute.
It highlights the significance and importance of preserving culture, history and heritage among the Filipinos,201d said Joyce Christine Colon, University Research Associate II of UP Visayas.
The exhibits describe Iloilo2019s transformation into one of the leading provinces in the country.
With the Cultural Institute, viewers can zoom in to appreciate the unique details and diverse influences on the architecture of religious landmarks such as the Miagao Church, a Unesco World Heritage site, the Jaro Cathedral, and the Molo Church.
The Cultural Institute also makes it possible to view structures such as the Miagao Church over time, by enabling users to place old and new photographs side by side.

Iloilo2019s prosperity resulting from the textile and sugar export trades can be seen in its grandiose ancestral homes, and in the construction of a number of public buildings also featured on the Cultural Institute.
Prime examples include Iloilo2019s first City Hall and the Baluarte Elementary School, the first public school in the Philippines established in 1905.

The history of Iloilo2019s City Hall, which was later donated to the University of the Philippines and declared a National Historical Landmark, can also be traced in a special exhibit.
Old photographs and documents tell the story behind its transition from city hall, to a garrison during World War II, to a university.

Another exhibit on the River Esplanade also puts the spotlight on the importance of Iloilo River in history and the government2019s bid to protect it and promote environmental consciousness among Ilonggos.
201cThe Philippines has such a rich culture to be proud of.
Every city and every province has something to show off and the Cultural Institute aims to make all these available to everyone in a format most accessible to them -- digital.
This is our effort to educate and inspire future generations,201d said Dennis Dizon, Google Cultural Institute program manager.

Mazda Pampanga moves back to permanent home, Mazda Pampanga moves back to permanent homeCITY OF SAN FERNANDO -- Today marks the date that an automotive icon moves back to its permanent home.
The bigger and better Mazda Pampanga under the Laus Group of Companies carries a new design for the whole dealership facility.

This was inspired under the new corporate identity of the iconic Japanese brand in the Philippines -- making it the first Mazda dealership in Central and Northern Luzon to put on this new look-image based on the new standards of Berjaya Auto Philippines.
The formal opening will take place today with the blessing and inauguration of the dealership facility along the progressive business strip of west Jose Abad Santos Avenue, this city.

The new showroom prides itself with a spacious nine-car display area featuring the award-winning Mazda vehicles.
While the service center boasts of advanced facilities and service bays that can accommodate ten vehicles at the same time.
201cThis same spot is where Mazdas were brought to fore several years ago.
Mazda Pampanga2019s renewed membership with the Laus Group of Companies will continue to bolster its reputation as a one-stop premium provider of customers2019 Mazda needs in the countryside,201d shared Mazda LausGroup Executive Director Lisset A.
Laus-Velasco.

201cMoving back to our original and permanent home has never been better and exciting.
Mazda Pampanga is all set to rev it up,201d she added.
Belonging to a renowned cluster of companies predominantly in auto dealership, Mazda LausGroup -- composed of dealerships in Pampanga, Tarlac Cabanatuan, and Dagupan -- has become a dynamic and innovative dealership network with outstanding products and services.
Teaching them early , Teaching them early Karlo Paolo R.
Pates, THE education sector has been doing its part to educate children about the importance of water and sanitation.

"It is the most important learning stage ng mga bata yung between kinder hanggang grade three kaya very important na ma-instill agad sa kanilang pagiisip ang cleanliness sa surroundings, personal hygiene, good grooming, among others," said Nelly Clemencia Serapio-Fabia, Department of Education 11's nutritionist and dietician.

Despite this, issues on health and sanitation persist right within campuses.
Pearl Diaz, an elementary teacher in one of the public schools in Tagum City, told Sun.Star Davao in a recent interview that they have also encountered problems on clogged water drainage and septic tanks inside the schools2019 premises.

201cGinalimpyohan namo na with the students pero mubalik gihapon ang mga problema ,201d said Diaz, adding that they been battling this for several years now.
They do their best to maintain cleanliness in the school grounds but they are affected by the community around.

201cMualingasaw man gud ang baho sa mga canal.
Apil na sad ang among septic tank puno na kayo.
Baho na gyud ,201d Diaz said.

Simon Cruz, another teacher in a public school in Lupon, Davao Oriental, shared similar problems which local authorities have been ignoring.

201cWe have been addressing this problem since it2019s the welfare of the students which we are looking at,201d Cruz said.
Cruz, for his part, said he2019s hoping that the education heads would look into these matters for it to be solved.
201cHow can the students learn and be educated in a smelly environment like this.
It should be addressed immediately since the school children are prone to skin and other diseases,201d he added.

These issues were raised to the regional office of the Deped-11 but insisted that they are not capable of solving these problems alone as the local government should also do its part.

Fabia, who was part of Deped inspectors who checked the schools in the region for the health and sanitation cases, admitted that there are schools particularly in the Davao del Norte and Davao Oriental which have problems in poor drainage and septic tank problems.

But she said that these problems materialized since these provinces have been used for different local, regional, and even national sporting events which is usually held every year.
201cEvident ito na mga problems especially sa mga schools na poor yung drainage system tapos dun pa nagho-hold ng mga sporting events like Davao Regional Athletic Association , Private Schools Athletic Association , and even Palarong Pambansa,201d Fabia said.
She admits encountering problems like septic tanks that have not been desludged.

201cIniform namin sila about it pero walang action,201d Fabia said, referring to LGUs.

The LGUs concerned should dispatch sanitary inspectors to the different private and public schools for them to see and verify the complaints with regard to the strict compliance in sanitation issues.
Other diseases which could affect the students include dengue, fever, colds and cough.

201cMarami kaming nao-observe na ganito ang issues at ini-admit naman naming na yung mga schools sa hinterland ay hindi talaga natin namo-monitor but we are now coordinating with the Division offices for updates on the situation,201d she added.
 
SYLLABUS INTEGRATION
The health programs have long been integrated in the syllabus of the subjects taught by the teachers in both private and public schools in the country.

201cThe integration of our programs is per subject basis.
When it comes to eating nutritious food and paglilinis ng surroundings as mafa-fall na siya sa Home Economics na subject.
So ganyan na ngayon,201d Fabia said.

There are also school-based programs but it is initiated by the Department of Health  where the students are the recipients of it.

These programs include feeding program where they are treated to free meals, food which majority of it came from their vegetable gardens inside the schools.
Aside from those programs, they also conduct seminars and lectures still spearheaded by personnel by DOH on topics on personal hygiene particularly on hand washing, tooth-brushing, and how to take care of their teeth.

201cThese lectures are done together with their parents so they would be guided properly even at home,201d she said.
Although the priorities of the program are those students who are malnourished, all students are qualified to avail both health and dental services.

The DOH will also provide toothbrush, toothpaste, along with iron-backed supplements.
Even with Deped2019s Essential Health Care Program  where the students are taught how to do proper hand washing, there is also a deworming program.
 
Fabia said the students are also taught waste segregation.

201cWe are still implementing the 5Rs in waste segregation which is to reduce, reuse, recycle, repair, and rethink.
We also tasked the schools to do composting,201d Fabia said.
 
True, children are being taught the proper way.
But usually, when they arrive home, the environment they live in does not support the learning they get, and there lies the problem.
Beyond just clean water: Health, marine resources, Beyond just clean water: Health, marine resourcesAce June Rell S.
Perez, UNTREATED waste water goes all the way to sea killing marine resources and contaminating waterways resulting to water-related diseases to men and degradation to the environment.
Recently, foreign interns from the Department of Science and Technology  in their study entitled 201cAssessment of Water Situation and the Safety of Wastewater and Sanitation in Selected Parts of Davao City201d showed that nearly all the wastewaters in Davao City is released back to the environment without treatment as hundreds of thousands of houses and shanties do not have septic tanks.

For the part of the regional office of the Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources , though big companies are mandated and regulated through its Pollution Control Officer, if small to medium companies and residents living in near coastal areas are not observing proper water waste disposal and proper sanitation, the waters are still at risk.
Maria Loida M.

Avorque, BFAR Davao chemist said that waste water treatment is important.
201cWe have what we call Decomposition process, it is a way of cleansing wastewaters before itatapon sa nature, and also water sampling should take place in order to measure the chemical and toxic content of the water,201d she said.
She said that autoclave process can ensure harmful chemical-free waters.
Autoclave uses high pressures and temperatures to achieve a specific purpose.
IN this case, steam sterilization.

201cAutoclave enables the wastes to be sterilized thus cleansing it to ensure that when it reaches our sea water it is already harmless to the environment,201d she said.
 Fisheries and Aquatic Resources Escherichia Coli , though it is normally found in warm-blooded mammals, like in human body, when it reaches to the 201cintolerable201d level it causes illnesses and poses threat to the environment.
Intolerable levels of E.coli are normally caused by fecal contamination by human and animal wastes through houses located near rivers, poultry and hog farms disposing wastes to the river, and not having sewerage and septage treatment facility.

E.Coli is an indication that there is fecal contamination, and when there is fecal contamination, bacteria will proliferate.
Under the Codex International Standards, the tolerable level of E.Coli content is only at 11 most probable number  per milliliter.
But report showed that total coliform found on both downstream and upstream of Davao River was estimated at 4,900 to 1,887,000 mpn per 100 ml.

Fatma Idris, BFAR Davao director, said that as their office only has jurisdiction over monitoring of water temperature and chemical content parameters she is urging local government units to strengthen measures on wastewater treatment and sewage disposal.
She was quick to add that E.coli contamination of waters poses greater risks to humans in the short term than marine animals.

201cAt some point it can destroy our marine resources but very minimal only.
Still we would not want that to happen but our very concern here is our health, we humans are more susceptible to the ill effects of the E.
coli bacteria contamination because if the fish or any seafood that we come to eat has a very high content of E.coli surely it can pose threat to our health,201d she said.
She added that there higher risk when beached marine animals are consumed by humans as beaching is an indication of something wrong with the creature.
It could be that it is sick or even has high metal contents.

201cThe bigger the fish, the bigger the possibility na mataas ang content nito that is being absorbed by their body,201d she added.
Because the effect of E.coli contamination to one2019s health and environment is usually not immediate, people should work together to ensure that E.
coli does not end up in the waters just because of improper wastewater and sewage disposal because once the effects are felt, the contamination level will most likely be irreversible or be very difficult to return to normal.
 
On Effects to tourism As beaches as one of our tourism assets in the region, high levels of coliform can be a threat to the tourism industry too.
201cIt can scare away our tourists and visitors,201d Roberto Alabado III, Department of Tourism -11 director said.
In a report, Councilor Leo Avila III had cited that some beaches in the city are 201cnot healthy for swimming,201d as per Environmental Management Bureau  water quality assessment.
GraciAngeles: A festival for the city2019s patrons and guardians, GraciAngeles: A festival for the city2019s patrons and guardiansANGELES CITY -- Angels will once again flock the streets of Angeles as this city is set to hold the second GraciAngeles festival, which is part of the Socio-Civic activities of Fiestang Kuliat 2015.

The festival 201cdedicated to the patrons and guardians of Angeles City201d will kick off on Friday, October 16, 6 p.m.
at the Sto.
Rosario Heritage District.
201cHolding the second GraciAngeles in the city is a testament to our community2019s willingness in further preserving, protecting and promoting the rich heritage and history of our place,201d said Mayor Edgardo Pamintuan.
The festival, once again organized by Peter De Vera of Sinukwan Kapampangan Training Center for the Arts, will feature different performers from participating schools, namely Achievers Special Education Center, Angeles City National Trade School, Republic Central Colleges, Teachers and Choreographers Dance Association, City College of Angeles, Holy Angel University, Systems Plus College Foundation, FG Nepomuceno Memorial High School, Sto.
Rosario Elementary School, and from Sinukwan Kapampangan as well.
 While the performers were dressed in all-white last year, they will be clad in silver and white for this year2019s GraciAngeles.

GraciAngeles is one of the major celebrations that mark Fiestang Kuliat that began last year, also under the conceptualization of Peter De Vera.

Caring for nature , Caring for nature 

Ace June Rell S.
Perez, WITH all the disheartening reports and stories in the news of cases of different endangered species being killed as game, one man in Sta.
Cruz, Davao del Sur stands firm with his principle of preserving and conserving the biodiversity.

Bernardo L.
Apal, a 36-year-old, a Bagobo-Tagabawa mason carpenter and farmer rescued a Pinsker's hawk-eagle christened as 201cMabikker201d last September 7 at 7:00 in the morning at the Mt.
Apo Natural Park within the protected area of Sibulan Hydro Plant of Hedcor.

Apal shared that the moment he saw Mabikker, helpless, injured and entangled in tree-roots within the protected area of Sibulan Hydro Plant, he rescued the eagle and walked for about two hours just to bring it to Brgy.
Sibulan Hall and Hedcor to surrender the eagle for medication.

201cAkong gibati, naluoy ko sa langgam kay nasangit sa bakilid, nalikos sa bagnot ug ugat, ako gikatkat ug gitabangan unya gidala dayun nko sa Barangay Hall ,201d he shared.

He said that even though he has just finished high school, he is well-informed about the need to conserve biodiversity.
 
A father of two children, Apal said that he is teaching his son and daughter to do the same.

201cSama ra gud na sa tao, kung nanginahanglan ug tabang walay rason aron dili sila tabangan ,201d he added.

He narrated that animals like eagles are not meant to be kept in captivity with the unauthorized individuals like him and the best thing to do is surrender it to the authority that can provide shelter and medication in order for the eagle to soar back to the wild where it truly belongs.
Mabikker when rescued was dehydrated and had an injury on its left eye.

It has since been rehabilitated and was released back to the wild at the Mt.
Apo Natural Park Wednesday after a month-long intensive care provided by a wildlife veterinarian, Dr.
Roberto "Bo" Puentespina Jr., who was contacted by Hedcor.
201cIf by chance I will encounter the same situation, I will respond the way I responded when I saw Mabikker.
My advice to the people who will encounter the same thing is that they should not shot or put in their hands the fate of the eagle rather surrender it to the authority for the safety and welfare of the bird,201d he said in the vernacular.
He dreams of the day when eagles and all birds fly free, without fear of being caught.
 
201cI don2019t think what I did was extraordinary, what I did is just something a person should do when confronted with that situation,201d Apal said.
Apal, more than just a former Citizen Armed Force Geographical Unit, a farmer, a carpenter, and a father is a hero in the eyes and heart of Mabikker.

Building a better future, Building a better future
 The Field of Dreams band serenades their sponsors and caretakers during their thanksgiving ceremony at the Matina Town Square as appreciation of their support and guidance to them.

Christine Joice C.
Cudis, Poverty is one of the country's most prevalent problem.
Worse is, without proper education, it can be passed from one generation to another.
 
Thus, Field of Dreams , a children's charity foundation is helping the abandoned, neglected, orphaned, indigent, and those who are living in the streets to fulfil their dreams of becoming useful individuals in the Philippines.
 Their organization was established in October 17, 2007 through the initiative of a British businessman, Lawrence Field.
  
He donated P12 million to the organization to buy the 2 hectare land for the construction and facilities of the residential care institution.
 
FOD have already produced 8 graduates who are now satisfied workers in different industries.
 
During its thanksgiving celebration last Saturday at the Matina Town Square, the 28 beneficiaries showcased their various talents in singing, dancing, and playing musical instruments to the very people who they owe their schooling- the staff and sponsors.
 
George L.
Cabaljog, the home manager of FOD said that most of the boys who goes to their center came from traumatic conditions.
One of them witnessed his mother kill his father as the former was reported to develop mental sickness due to drastic poverty.
 
"That is why, we are conducting a lot of counseling and social interactions here to help them recover from their past," he added.
 
Among the graduates is the 23-year-old Anito Blanco, who also had the same fate with the rest of the adopted boys in the foundation.
He and his siblings were left by their parents to their relatives who did not care for them after they separated.
 Blanco with a teary eye said, 
"If hindi ako napadpad sa Field of Dreams, siguro isa akong tambay ngayon na may maraming anak."  
Now that he is already working as a call center agent in this city, he still goes back to the foundation - to give back to the staff and to inspire the other adopted children to push through with their education.

City Social Services and Development Office  Assistant Department Head, Liwayway Caligdong also expressed her gratitude to the organization for their deep concern in providing education to those who cannot afford it.
 
"With the kind of nurture and care that the organization provides, they are making the children feel that they are a part of family and somebody wants them to succeed," she added.
 
All educational requirements including uniforms, books, fees, travelling costs, etc.
Regular Medical/Dental checks, and access to treatment are given to the 30 boys who are now under their care.
 
Apart from moral guidance and social development, they are also trained to farm as they have a banana and cacao plantation in their area.
 
Behind all these are the generous and kind staffs that maximize the children's potential to live a happy, healthy, and productive life.
 
Incidentally, Mr.
Field recently wrote Sun.Star Davao an email expressing his gratitude for the help extended by the newspaper when it published its dire straits the foundation was in as Mr.
Field was already running out of funds and there were the children to sustain.

Sun.Star wrote about their dilemma and a local foundation reached out to them.
 
Through the article, Field said, the Anflo Management and Investment Corporation knew about their state and offered to help.
 
201cThanks for the coverage of our dilemma, and positive response that we have now received,201d Field said in his email.

201cThank you for affording me the opportunity to publicize our need, and our success is the direct result of your article.
I cannot over emphasize the importance of the response to your efforts.
Thank you, thank you, thank you.201d
Dream reception, Dream receptionRuji Peter S.
Abat, FOLLOWING a solemn wedding ceremony, it's on to the light moments during the wedding reception.
Hence, some of the top hotels in Davao City offer various wedding reception packages to provide newlyweds with the venue, the banquet and the services that make up a memorable experience for one of the most important events among couples.
The Marco Polo Hotel offers a Blissful Wedding Package at P1,300 per head minimum of 100 persons.
It is inclusive of free use of the function room for four hours, a Continental buffet menu, a bottle of sparkling wine for toasting, two nights stay with buffet breakfast for the couple at the deluxe room, pool passes for four and waived corkage for up to two pieces of lechon and three bottles of wine.
At the Grand Regal Hotel, packages include the free use of function room for four hours, bottle of wine, a fruit basket upon check-in, a buffet breakfast for two at the Brasserie Restaurant, free use of the swimming pool, sauna and fitness center and free entrance to the Casino Filipino for the guests.
The prices then vary based on the menu as The Grand Regal Hotel offers packages starting at P550 per person, P650, P750 and P850.
Over at The Ritz Hotel at Garden Oasis, the Ruby Package is pegged at P58,888 for a minimum of 100 persons, inclusive of an indoor function room, free overnight stay at the Deluxe room with breakfast for two, a standard room, free use of bridal car for three hours, eight food entries in the menu, a wedding cake, a free bottle of wine for the ceremonial toasting, free massage for the couple and a meal certificate for the couple during their first anniversary.
Meanwhile, The Royal Mandaya Hotel offers packages from P600 to P1,000 per person.

The Infinite Package  with a minimum of 100 persons includes free use of function room, a glass of wine for each guest, an international lunch or dinner buffet, a complimentary overnight stay in a Premiere room with breakfast for two at the Kamayo Cafe, a gift check for an overnight stay at the Premiere Room and swimming pool passes for six persons.
Wedding planners to the rescue, Wedding planners to the rescueRhealyn C.
Pojas, WEDDING preparations are not the right time to be stressed out but a time to chill, relax, and just be merry while anticipating the big day.
Couples who are planning to tie the knot need not do all the leg works for their weddings.

In just a matter of choosing the right people to tap, wedding preparations will flow smoothly.
Maria Maureen Basilan, Defining Concept wedding planner for 15 years, advised couples to pick the right suppliers and wedding coordinators for their weddings.

Most couples who plan to settle down either have jobs or businesses to manage every day, thus, making appointments for wedding inquiries seems like a tough idea.
201cMay mga couples na may trabaho na, so hindi nila maaasikaso ng 100% ang preparation ng kanilang weddings," Basilan said.

This is where wedding planners come into the picture so that couples may find relief in planning, organizing, and preparing the necessary supplies needed for this once-in-a-lifetime event.

As a wedding planner for many years, Basilan advised couples to personally hire wedding organizers who are credible and check whether it has been in the business for many years to ensure that the money they keep for their wedding is safe.
201cChoose your suppliers wisely,201d she said.
Couples should not be ashamed to communicate with their chosen wedding planners regarding the budget they had appropriated for their weddings, Basilan said adding that it is their job to stretch or get proper allocation for the budget.
She suggested that clubhouses usually work on weddings under tight budget.
Interested couples who may want to coordinate with Basilan for their wedding may reach her through 09258558856.
60% of Matina Enclaves homebuyers are married, 60% of Matina Enclaves homebuyers are marriedSOME 60 percent of Matina Enclaves' house-and-lot and condo buyers are married.
Project director Gerald Kent Garces, in an interview with Sun.Star Davao, said, "Mostly, married couples ang nag-iinvest sa mga projects namin.
They are the ones who have businesses or are gainfully-employed."
Garces said singles who also purchased units at The Plains, one-hectare open lot development, or at The Courtyard, another one-pocket development for residential units, or at The Enclaves Residences, a proposed mid-rise nine-building condominium project, are usually overseas Filipino workers .
"Locals dito are usually people who would invest not for the first time.
Siguro ang investment nila sa Matina Enclaves pang nth time na," Garces said.
He said for start-up families with husband and wife having a combined income of P40,000, they can avail of a P2.2 million studio-type condo unit at The Enclaves Residences starting at an amortization of P6,900 a month.
Reservation fee is P20,000 cash.

"For the equity, we just require 20 percent downpayment, half of which is payable in 29 months.
We have in-house financing at zero interest but later we advise buyers to seek bank financing," Garces said.
He said that buying a house or a condo is better than renting out a place, "You rent out P3,000 or P4,000 a month but the property will never be yours.
In reality, one would want to have his or her own place, especially when he or she can afford it.
Now is really a good time for people to invest."
In Davao City, he said, affordability is the name of the game.
Thus, developers offer more relaxed financing schemes, discounts and freebies, among other perks.
"At Matina Enclaves, we give the real essence of more value for money.
Our location is strategic, our units are not small.
Our product is well finished and cheaper than others in the market," he said.
Matina Enclaves is a project of Escandor Development Corporation.

Flowers for serenity, excitement, Flowers for serenity, excitementKarina V.
Canedo, STYLE and arrangement of flowers in weddings and other events are important because it creates an atmosphere of loveliness, serenity and excitement.

Jill Gascon-Padua, designer-owner of Swan Lake, Davao based company that specializes in decorating and organizing services such as weddings, debut, birthdays, and corporate events, bared this to Sun.Star Davao.
She said, "Flowers is also significant instrument to create an atmosphere of sacredness in holy matrimony.

"The grandeur of the event can also be displayed through the creative arrangements of the flowers" she added.
Padua said they can usually set the trend by posting their creations online then what goes viral among the posted pictures becomes the "trend" within a year or so.
She said they lace their own clients' taste and their own creativity.
She added that they are usually keen on following their clients' wishes and despite the fact that some like to pattern their flowers from a previous theme, Swan Lake tries to make each event unique.
She added that pastel-colored flowers are usually their bestsellers.
Their first wedding event was the wedding of the son of Davao City Councilor Leonardo Avila III.
Since then, Swan Lake has also been tapped as florist and event organizer of weddings inside and outside Davao.

A wedding like no other, A wedding like no other
Bushido Kimono Wedding
Karlo Paolo R.
Pates, EVERY wedding is unique, special.
If a couple in England tied the knot before jumping off from a bungee jump platform, a couple here in Davao City opted for an offbeat style of ceremony - Bushido Kimono Wedding - instead of a traditional church set-up.
Long-time lovers Raymund Adocal, 24, and Nesseth Albinda-Adocal, 24, both students of King's Sword -Davao Martial Arts under its founder and chief instructor Nell Jone Astudillo, signified their love for each other by tying the knot last October 10 at the Hope Mountain in Brgy.
Ulas, Davao City.

The Bushido Kimono Wedding is a karate-themed ceremony wherein the groom and the pastor wear kimonos.

Real blackbelters wearing karate suit were positioned at the aisle while holding their swords.
They were tasked to welcome the entourage during the start of the procession.
Traditional church wedding is quite similar with the Bushido Kimono-themed one except on the kissing part as the families and guests shout "jozal senjo" that means "always present on battle".
During the reception, they used mini sword instead of using a knife to cut the wedding cake while the groom kicks the pi\xf1ata to reveal the candies and the coins to signify abundance in their married life.
Raymund, in an interview with Sun.Star Davao, said they came up with the idea of the Bushido Kimono wedding to make their ceremony simple.
"We wanted to make the celebration simple, memorable and unique," said Raymund, adding that their romance started during the days of their trainings in the karate organization American Bushido Kai Karate Association .
"Hindi naman po kailangan mahal yung wedding.
Ang importante kasi sa amin ng wife ko is we honor God through the ceremony of marriage," he said.
Raymund also believes that there is no secret formula to a successful marriage.

2015 wedding theme: simple and classic, 2015 wedding theme: simple and classicKriztja Marae G.
Labrador, 201cTHE big day201d as what others call it, a wedding ceremony will always be one of the most awaited and special event of every person2019s life as it is a union of two people not only in the eyes of the law but also in the eyes of God.
From the color motif to clothes and set decorations, wedding trends vary every year and for this year a local wedding expert shares the latest wedding themes and styles preferred by couples for their 201cbig day.201d
201cSimple and classic,201d that2019s how Dazzle by JP events and wedding owner Jong Paguia sums up the latest trends in wedding themes for 2015.

According to him, couples getting married right now tend to focus more on the details when it comes to their wedding themes.
One of the themes mostly opted by their clients said Jong is the 201cRoyal wedding201d theme: an elegant wedding entourage perfect for the King and Queen, for this theme most of their clients choose pastel colors such as light pink for their color motif.
Next theme is 201cElegant rustic:201d Jong explains that this theme is more for vintage lovers, highlighting old but classic styles.

Another commonly opted theme is the 201cCherry blossom201d which features the famous pretty pink flower commonly found in Japan.
201cCouples right now want their weddings to be really well 2013prepared up to the last detail unlike before where weddings were just simple, right now they really splurge on it,201d says Jong.
For some celebrity weddings this year, we can also recall that celebrity couple Dingdong Dantes and Marianne Rivera also had a royal theme for their wedding and a simple but classic theme for Paul Soriano and Toni Gonzaga.

Dazzle by JP events and wedding is located at Malvar St.
beside Davao Doctor's College or you may contact  866-1283.
 Faith, constant work for a lasting marriage,  Faith, constant work for a lasting marriage
Caluban2013Corsiga couple
Ivy C.
Tejano, MARRIAGE, under any circumstance, requires a leap of faith and constant work.
For Telesforo and his wife Teresa Caluban2013Corsiga, this is how their marriage is working for the 55 years now aside from the love they have for each other.
The two met in Abuyog town, Leyte when Teresa2019s sister married Telesforo2019s brother.
The courtship took about three years before Teresa, who was then 16 at last answered yes Telesforo, then 22.
201cDili pa jud musugot akong papa, ginapabulag mi tungod akong magulang minyo sa iyahang magulang, maot man daw na ,201d Teresa said.
But the two did not separate despite their parents2019 reprimand, Telesforo said, adding that their relationship continued even though they barely see each other.
Until one day Telesforo2019s elder brother died due to an illness.
He said it was only then when his relationship with Teresa was given a chance.
Telesforo, however, came to Davao City to look for a job.
He said distance was never a hindrance to their relationship.
He added that he wrote and sent letters to Teresa most of the time.
But one day, Teresa was encouraged by her cousin to work in Manila so the couple lost communication but after three years, Teresa was informed that Telesforo already returned to Leyte and had been asking for her whereabouts.
201cI also went home.
I didn't realize that he already sought the blessing of my parents to marry me.
He formally asked me to marry him, saying that he can already take care of me having bought a lot and built a house in Davao," she reminisced.
Teresa said their dating relationship lasted for about 10 years, including the time they were apart from each other.
The couple was blessed with 10 children, unfortunately, two have died.
Telesforo is now 86 years old while Teresa is 81.
There is no secret for a long-lasting relationship, according to them.
They only said that a couple must have to work their relationship with God 2013 talk and plan together, settle differences and be happy and contented with each other.

After all, marriage is a commitment and never a contest.
Wise investments, Wise investmentsAce June Rell S.
Perez, THE day after a wedding is said to be the commencement of the couple2019s married life.
Financial security and investment decisions as husband and wife follow.
More than just union of love and soul, and the grandeur celebration, marriage represents the gateway into a new institution that2019s governed as much by finances as emotion.

And for every young couple every peso truly counts, which explains why venturing into wise investments is vital.

Saving for future
Towards a secured family future is investing to trusted financial insurance, like Sun Life Insurance.
One of the securest investments a couple can make is engaging in Sun Life2019s SUN Safer Life, a five-year renewable and convertible term life insurance  product, that provides guaranteed maximum protection, keeping one2019s family future safe as leaving nothing to chance.
201cThe benefits of this insurance product are valuable life insurance coverage equal to 200 percent of the face amount, additional protection in case of insured2019s total and permanent disability and accidental health, longer protection until your golden years with the automatic renewal of coverage and conversion to any eligible life insurance product without hassle,201d Sun Life Financial said.
Invest in a house or condo
One of the trends nowadays is investing in properties like housing units and condominiums.
Verdon Parc, a three-hectare condominium complex comprising of four high-end buildings, located on Ecoland Drive in Davao City, is one of the latest offering of DMC-Urban Property Developers Inc.
, a premier property developer in the country.
A couple may also own a housing unit at DECA Homes Catalunan Grande that was launched last Oct.
16.
For at least over P7,200 monthly amortization via Pag-Ibig, one can avail of a 100-square meter dream DECA home located in a nice environment with amenities like basketball courts, multi-purpose hall, parks and playground, among others.
Matina Enclaves, owned by Davao City's homegrown developer Escandor Development Corporation , also offers affordable condo units at The Enclaves Residences as well as Aeon Towers of FTC Group of Companies, Alveo and Avida of Ayala Land, Camella Northpoint of Vista Land, Vivaldi Residences of Euro Towers, and Inspiria of Garden Estate Enterprises, among others.
Couples may also choose to invest at Ciudades of Lapanday Properties, Suntrust of Mega World Corporation and Seawind of Damosa Land, Inc.

Honeymoon to remember
Newlyweds may also invest in a most memorable honeymoon.
But they need not go far and spend so much for a trip.
Eden Nature Park in Toril, Davao City features amenities that best suit the occasion.
Eden's honeymoon package, for as low as P8,880 per couple, share happiness and love and relaxation for three days, two nights inclusion of accommodation at the Vista Cottage, one romantic dinner with a bottle of wine , one regular dinner, one lunch , two breakfasts, complimentary use of the swimming pool, entry to the fishing village, guided shuttle tour around the park, skyriding and heights adventure, and a fruit basket.
Plan your best and memorable honeymoon with your better half for it is just a once-in-a-lifetime moment.
Wise investments, however, entail careful planning.
Failing to plan, is indeed, planning to fail.
Down memory lane, Down memory laneMarianne L.
Saberon-Abalayan, EXACTLY 10 years ago, Oct.
22, 2005, Alvin and I got married at Randrews Golf Range at Shrine Hills in Matina.

It was transformed into a garden wedding with a great panoramic view of Davao City.
We tied the knot after five months of engagement following a 29-month steady dating relationship.
Whites and aqua blues were the dominant colors that Saturday afternoon.
It rained the night before and we were thankful it didn't rain during our big day.
Our families were there, friends, relatives, church mates, colleagues and bosses, too.
Walking down the aisle by myself made me nervous, I felt like everybody was looking at me and I thought what if I might stumble.

But looking on ahead, I looked at our minister evangelist Vincent Literal who flew all the way from Cebu then I saw my waiting groom.
I fought back tears trying not mess my make-up.
My mother Aleli and Sir Tony Ajero, who stood as my father since my own father passed away when I was 17, fetched me at the middle of the aisle and turned me over to Alvin.
I kissed them both and held Alvin's hand.
It was the same hand that I held when we made our personal vows, albeit with teary eyes and shaking voice, in front of God and in front of our loved ones and other witnesses.
It was the same hand I held when we exchanged our rings.

Ten years later, today, God has been so gracious and faithful, blessing us with two wonderful sons, nine-year-old Sean Nicolas and two-year-old Shem Nathaniel.
It's not a perfect marriage but we have a perfect God who continues to mold us to be the husband and wife He desire us to be, every single day.

Others, too, share their most memorable part of their respective wedding ceremonies.
 
"When I started to walk the aisle, when my parents handed me to Bob," Catherine Wong Ocon.
Her husband Joseph, also known as Bob, shared: "The most memorable part was wen I saw the most beautiful woman of my life from afar.
Seems it was the longest minutes of waiting before she reached my open arms to be mine forever." Both wed last October 23, 1980.
They now have two granddaughters from their eldest of their four children.
For Ma.
Fe Gatchalian Caparas, assistant principal of Holy Child College of Davao, said, "Most memorable was when we exchanged our vows to love each other forever." She married Eric 18 years ago and has a son named Gabriel.
Businessman Donny Teo, for his part, said: "When we exchanged our wedding vows together, to love each other in sickness and in health, for richer or for poorer and when we kissed each other." He tied the knot with Charlene Gabucan on Dec.
17, 2006.
Both have adorable daughter Sam and son Seb.
Dentist Dr.
Ferdinand Oreta said, "Our wedding was held May 28, 1995 in Samal Island, the first time they activated the electricity.
The most special part was our wedding vows aside from feeling awkward about kissing each other in front of many people." He married Karen Nina Macasaet and they have three children - Nadine, Carl and Julia.
Certified public accountant Maricel Fuentes Felix, meanwhile said, "The bridal march when Dalton met me and our personal vows were memorable.
His words were so heartfelt and romantic ." The couple, who married on March 12, 2011, is blessed with two kids, Zion and baby Lexi.

Vispop champ stars 'Gugmang Giatay', Vispop champ stars 'Gugmang Giatay'VISPOP 3.0 champ Lourdes May Maglinte claims she is a theatre neophyte.
But she surely is prepped up for the spotlight to play Inday, the main character of the very first Bisrock jukebox musical 201cGugmang Giatay201d.
The homegrown production to hit the CAP Auditorium on October 23 and 24, presents a story of love and its power to transcend everything, its plot thickening in a setting that is purely Cebuano.
The story revolves around Inday, a hardworking daughter who ventures into the city to find a living, who becomes sandwiched by the struggles of her family, her love interests Ben and Undo, and her own insecurities.
This seemingly clich\xe9 soap opera role doesn2019t trouble Maglinte, a survivor of the harsh realities of life.
201cThere was this constant struggle of having to prove yourself despite people judging you physically,201d said Lourdes, recalling her battles with self-doubt on her figure.
201cInday sticks to what she believes in and fights for her dreams,201d thus quipped Lourdes.
201cThat2019s how I can relate with Inday and her 2018maoy2019 sessions.201d
Maglinte2019s journey in the characterization of Inday in 201cGugmang Giatay201d is what she finds great in her first appearance on a legitimate theatre stage.
She considers the creative process as very dynamic as she claims the team behind the production lets her explore and experiment.
Fresh from her winning stint in the Visayan songwriting competition, Maglinte finds hardcore discipline in theatre, which emphasizes the importance of creating a path that guides the audience to the right character and the right story.
In contrast, in singing and songwriting, 201cthere are no boundaries201d.
Lourdes discovers that her passion for both is the same.
And since she has already stamped her name in the Bisaya music scene, she is now making sure she is composed enough for the audience2019s applause soon at the 201cGugmang Giatay201d2019s curtain call.
201cGugmang Giatay201d is produced by 2TinCans Philippines and written and directed by Offbeat Concepts Production House.
For ticket details, contact Adelfa at 09331880999.

Mary's favorite prayer, Mary's favorite prayer201cThe Rosary is Christocentric setting forth the entire life of Jesus Christ, the passion, death, resurrection and glory.201d 2014 Mariology, Juniper B.
Carol, O.F.M.
THE month of October is known to be the month of the Holy Rosary for the Catholic believers.
Way back 1206, Mary appeared to St.
Dominic after he had been praying and repenting for his lack of success in combating the Albigensian heresy -- taught that there were two gods: the good god of light usually referred to as Jesus in the New Testament and the god of darkness and evil usually associated with Satan and the 201cGod of the Old Testament .
Mary praised and gave him the Rosary as a mighty weapon, according to an account by Alan de la Roch, a fifteenth century Dominican.
Friday, October 16, 2015, the Fiat organization of the University of the Philippines Cebu  organized an event called Living Rosary, where students, together with Emma Gandionco, organization2019s adviser and UPC2019s libririan, Father Thomas Dunton, brothers Kees van Duijin and Peter-Andrew Frossard, joined forces in commemorating the month of Rosary.
In line with that celebration and before the actual prayer of rosary, Father Thomas brought up five important points to ponder upon why Catholics have to pray the rosary.
Remembering Christ with Mary.
It is through praying the rosary that God is revealing Himself to those who believed in Him.
According to Father Thomas, praying the rosary is a way of healing the wounded, giving remedy for the burdened and that rosary promotes spiritual health and well-being of the souls.
201cThe Rosary honors and contemplates Mary too.201d 2014 Mariology, Juniper B.
Carol, O.F.M.
Learning Christ.
A way to know more Christ and how related is Mary to Him is manifested while praying the rosary.
"Because of the mission she received from God, her life is most closely linked with the mysteries of Jesus Christ, and there is no one who has followed in the footsteps of the Incarnate Word more closely and with more merit than she" 142 .
Meditation on this cycle of Joyful, Sorrowful, Glorious and Luminous Mysteries makes the Rosary not only "a breviary or summary of the Gospel and of Christian life," .
The rosary is learning not just merely about Christ but Christ Himself as the Revelation.
Being conformed to Christ.
To be like Christ and to live a life how Christ wants His people to live is the latter2019s greatest challenge, given with all the circumstances and temptations present on earth.
For a believer to grow with a mind and heart like Jesus Christ and to have a spiritual journey that lives with the presence of Mary, the rosary is the greatest tool that could be used.
Praying to Christ with Mary.
Many people believe that through prayers, they can communicate with God, and it is the most fundamental foundation required to establish a strong relationship with Jesus.
Father Thomas elaborated that through the rosary, Mary shows the way to reach Jesus and she leads our way to our Father.
"Today, when dangers far greater than those of the ancient Turks threaten not only Christianity but all civilization, we are urged by our Blessed Mother to turn again to the Rosary for help.201d 2014 Mary in our Life by Fr.
William G.
Most
Proclaiming Christ.
Mary is the woman of faith, silence, and contemplation, and her way to find Jesus is by praying the rosary.
Praying the rosary is the way of proclaiming about Christ and being proclaimed as a son of God.
"Since the prayers of the Rosary come from such excellent sources 2014 from Our Lord Himself, from inspired Scripture, and from the Church 2014 it is not surprising that the Rosary is so dear to our Blessed Mother and so powerful with heaven." 2014 Mary in our Life by Fr.
William G.
Most
The event was concluded successfully as God showed his miracle.
It never rained during the whole program though there were already little drops.

The Fiat members distributed blessed rosary bracelets as souvenirs and as a sign of gratitude to those who attended and became a part of the living rosary.

Working student is exemplary child of Northern Mindanao, Working student is exemplary child of Northern MindanaoA WORKING student has been hailed as the Exemplary Pantawid Pamilya Child 2015 of Northern Mindanao in Cagayan de Oro City.
Angel Anne Marie Jabian, 14, of Purok 2, Mitazan, Aloran, Misamis Occidental, bested other four provincial representatives during the two-day search in Cagayan de Oro City recently.
A daughter of a farmer, Angel disclosed that the income of her parents is not sufficient to support her daily fare in going to her school, Aloran Trade High School, from her house, that2019s why she volunteered herself to become a working student to one of her relatives living near the school.
Angel2019s residence is relatively far from the school and she would spend P30 a day for her fare before.
But, Angel is quick to add that she managed to balance her studies and household chores.
A consistent Top 1 pupil from Grade 1 to Grade 6 during her elementary formation; Angel has never been absent from school despite her obligations as a working student.
201cI persevere to achieve my dreams to become successful in the future,201d Angel said during her first radio interview in a local station here.
Good example to others
When asked about her passion, Angel disclosed that she wants to become good example to others.
201cI want to be different from others in a good way because I know, I am unique.
I want to become a good example to others,201d Angel said.
Serving as the newly ambassador of children2019s rights in Northern Mindanao, Angel is overwhelmed by the support from her family, school administrators, local government unit, and other stakeholders of Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program in Misamis Occidental.
201cIt2019s worth the hardwork and diligence that I have invested.
I owe this to Pantawid Pamilya, my mentors, my family, my friends and to my God,201d Angel said, adding that she is a proud beneficiary of Pantawid Pamilya.
Changes in life
Every day, Angel2019s father, Rey, will visit and cultivate the family2019s rice fields while her mother Mariter will take care of her and her elder sister.
Either under the scorching heat of the sun or under a heavy downpour, Angel2019s father has to work hard to support the family2019s need.
201cHonestly, every afternoon when I got home from school in my elementary years, I can see from my naked eyes that my father is really tired from work.
I feel guilty of it,201d shared Angel during the radio interview.
201cSad to say, his income is not enough for my needs.
At that moment, I was losing hope to finish my studies.
Until such time when we became a beneficiary of Pantawid Pamilya,201d added the teary-eyed Angel.
 
Angel2019s family became beneficiary of the program in 2011.
201cPantawid Pamilya is a great help to my family.
I can already buy the materials and supplies needed for my projects on time.
Because of Pantawid Pamilya, I achieved good grades and I maintain my top post,201d said Angel.
Aside from that, Angel told us that, 201cPantawid helped educate my parents and other beneficiaries in terms of livelihood, health and wellness, education for children and many others.201d
As it is, 201cI am always been grateful to DSWD and all other government agencies which helped us fight poverty.201d
Meanwhile, Rosa Bianca Galos of Mambajao, Camiguin, and Regine Dablo of Lagonglong, Misamis Oriental, have earned the second and third spots, respectively.
The contender were judged based on their behavior and practice, talent, intelligence and wit, community and school participation, and Kaya Koa ng Pagbabago  presence and appearance.
The search is conducted to recognize the children beneficiaries of the program who set examples at home, in school, and in their community.
It is one of the strategies of Pantawid Pamilya to encourage the children to nurture habits and values that would mold them to good and active citizens.

Chasing a dream, Chasing a dreamIvy C.
Tejano, "IT WAS a rollercoaster ride."
This is how Daryl Silapan Mislang described his life as an overseas Filipino worker  for more than four years now.
He is currently working at the Asiatica Restaurant in Kyoto, Japan as a waiter.
Born on October 1, 1988 in Sto.
Tomas, Davao del Norte province, Mislang completed his degree of Bachelor of Arts in English from the Holy Cross of Davao College in 2008.
Chasing his dream to travel around the world has encouraged Mislang to venture life abroad.
It was not easy though, he said, but he does not want to die without trying to reach his dream.
Before going abroad, Mislang worked as an image reviewer for MySpace account at Sutherland Global Services and a part-time medical representative in a pharmaceutical company in Davao City from 2008-2009.
In 2009, he worked at the Sycore Davao as outbound sales associate.
In 2010, he started a buy-and-sell computer business with his friend Deoffrey Ben Amora.
"It was actually great sa sugod kay mukita pa man ko until such time na scam ko.
Kailangan daw niya ug ingon ani na unit, nipalit pud ko unya gipadala sa Air-21 .
It took months before I realized that I was scammed," Mislang said.
"Pero wala na.
Nabaligya na nako akoang laptop, relo na niregalo pa sa akoang papa, and other valuable things.
Ang nabilin cellphone nalang.
Wala ko kasabot unsa ako gibati that time, naka-utang pa ko sa ako mga friends ," he added.
But life must go on, Mislangsaid, adding that there is nothing he can do on what was already lost.
He quit his business and entered modeling.
"I was hired as an ambassador for Cherry Mobile cellular phones.
I was also asked to join several caravans and modeling for apparels but I also came to a point where I was really down," Mislang said.
Mislang then decided to return home to find peace.
But later on, he then applied as a barangay watcher in Sto.
Tomas.
He added that he had been a barangay watcher in 2011.
"I saved up but my money it is still not enough.
Until I was not able to handle it any longer, I asked money from my parents and told them that I will work abroad," Mislang said in vernacular.
His father Isabelo Mislang Jr.
has a small business in town, while his mother Vivian is a teacher.
The couple is blessed with three children, and Daryl is the eldest.
In February 2012, Mislang went to Hong Kong.
It was also on the same year when he went to Singapore, Thailand and Malaysia as a tourist.
He also went to Qatar, Jeddah and Riyadh in 2013.
"I used the money given by my father as a chance to look for what I want to do.
From that, I invested on what he gave me and I also do modeling once in a while.
Then, I decided to work in Jeddah," Mislang said.
However, Mislang was detained in Jeddah for violating some rules.
In 2014, Mislang transferred to Al Khobar and worked as a waiter at Fresh Italian Dining.
On the same year he went to Bahrain then Dammam in January 2015 before he decided to settle down for a work in Japan.
Mislang is now in Davao City for a vacation.
He will return to Japan next year not only for work, but also to study information technology at the Urawa Tokyo International School in Tokyo City.
"I thank God for all these opportunities.
I am happy now, yes, although a part of my life is still missing.
But I know God is leading me the way, step-by-step lang.
For now, I am spending time with my loved ones," Mislang said.
Forest guardians: 6 years, still strong, Forest guardians: 6 years, still strongStella A.
Estremera, IT WAS a bumpy start six years ago when villagers were organized to protect the forest of Mt.
Sinaka in Arakan Valley, North Cotabato.
From the looks of the wary village residents, it sounded like a lot of work.
For one, the Mt.
Sinaka Bantay Kalikasan Alliance had made it part of their members' task to keep a regular inventory of the existing trees on the slopes of Mt.
Sinaka, which will require the members to stay overnight in the leech-infested forests.
The BK is made up of five barangays around Mt.
Sinaka: Lanao Kuran, Datu Ladayon, Salasang, San Miguel, and Tumanding.
Of the five, Tumanding is the purely Manobo village.
Others have Visayan settlers and lumads as residents.
For the past five years, alliance members have been celebrating their anniversaries in Davao City funded by the municipal agriculture office and municipal environment and natural resources office of Arakan Valley along with the non-government organization Kinaiyahan Foundation Inc.
But last October 19, they celebrated their sixth year for the first time, right in their village; and sans fund solicitation from the municipal offices and KFI.
It's their way of showing that they can now attend to their concerns by chipping in what they can.
Last October 19's celebration was hosted by Barangay Tumanding, although every barangay contributed for the food of everybody.
The celebration was made even more meaningful as just the Saturday before, on October 17, was the fourth death anniversary of Fr.
Fausto "Pops" Tentorio, PIME.
Fr.
Pops dedicated much of his time to Manobo people of Barangay Tumanding, teaching them ways to protect their environment and providing them livelihood projects to entice them from destroying Mt.
Sinaka.
"Unta ang iyang gibilin na mga buluhaton, atong ipadayon; ipadayon ang gisugdan ni Fr.
Pops ," Menro Jimmy B.
Montero said in his message during the program.
In a huddle with women members, the women admitted that their membership has grown but has not yet been able to involve every resident in a barangay.
"Layo pa gayud sa katunga ," one woman said.
But all three observed that even the non-members are already taking better care of the environment.
"We talked to them, we urged them not to clear areas in Mt.
Sinaka for their farms," one of the women said in Visayan, adding that those who used to slash and burn areas on Mt.
Sinaka have actually other farmlots outside the protected zone.
There was resistance, but through constant reminders, more and more are convinced that the greater good will come when they protect the mountain.
"There are still rule breakers," MAO Edgar V.
Arana said, "those who secretly destroy the forests.
We still need to intensify our campaigns for forest protection."
But he urged the members and residents to strive for "malahutayong kalamboan" or sustainable development.
"Malahutayon ang kalamboan kung naa na ta'y naipon na kayamanan - natural na capital.
Kung mapalambo ang kalasangan, mapatambok ang yuta, masulti nato na naa ta'y malahutayong kalamboan ," he said.
Kagawad Dante Dumanding, who is the pointman for the Philippine Eagle Foundation  in the area said that the Tumanding indigenous peoples organization already has 200 hectares for their greening program, while PEF has provided for an 85-hectare reforestation.
The officers and members were on in saying that it took the cooperation of all, villagers, BK members, and the local government, to put in motion this community-based environmental movement that is somehow enabling them to better provide for their families and organization needs through better farm yields.
During the celebration, barangay Salasang hauled in two sacks of rambutan for the people's snacks, while barangay San Miguel provided the "sahog", the basic ingredients like onions and green pepper, for the food the villagers had to prepare for all.
The other barangays contributed as well, all from their people and their farms.
Activities that barangays hold to impart the message of environment protection to both young and old include crafting barangay ordinances that require every child and youth to plant a certain number of trees for them to be able to join a sports league and imposing a penalty of planting 100 trees and taking care of this for one whole year for anyone caught violating a barangay ordinance banning the cutting of trees.
All five barangays are also maintaining tree nurseries to keep planting materials ready all the time.
Mt.
Sinaka has been identified as the major source of drinking water for the whole Arakan Valley and parts of Davao City.

The forests of Mt.
Sinaka are the habitat of indigenous flora and several wild fauna, including the endangered Philippine Eagle as well as civet cats, Philippine macaques, wild pigs, and deers.
"Nalipay mi'g dako na sa unom ka tuig nagadaghan 'ta, aron matanom sa atong kasing-kasing ang kaimportante sa kinaiyahan ,"Tumanding barangay captain Gayuting Tumanding said.
The challenge to ensure that the forests are protected gains magnitude as a highway now runs across these villages and around the mountain, with the project expected to be completed by February next year.
The concrete highway that will make transport of their farm produce and interaction among the different villages easier will also make it easy for poachers to come and go...
Welcoming #Manilakbayan2015 with a concert for the Lumad, Welcoming #Manilakbayan2015 with a concert for the Lumad
Bayang Barrios at ang Naliyagan 
THE League of Authors of Public Interests Songs , in partnership with Senado, the association of government employees in the Philippine Senate, welcomes the Lumad and #Manilakbayan2015 delegates in a concert featuring Lapis members Chickoy Pura of the Jerks, and Bayang Barrios and the indigenous sound of band Naliyagan, among other performers.
The initiative seeks to raise awareness about militarization in Mindanao and the plight of the Lumad.
201cThe Lumad are the real OPM,201d said singer-composer Gary Granada.
201cThey are the full-blooded Original Pilipino Masa! We raise awareness to ensure that this generation learn from the culture of its ancestors.201d
201cWe must support the Lumad, their schools and communities,201d said Karl Ramirez, singer-composer and Lapis coordinator.
201cIf you2019d look back at history, government has been evicting indigenous people from ancestral lands to allow big corporations -- mining, logging, to plunder our resources.
Nothing has changed! This has to stop!201d
The concert 201cKaisa ng Lumad para sa Karapatan, Kabuhayan, Lupa at Kalikasan201d happening from 1 p.m.
to 4 p.m.
of October 27, Tuesday, will be held at Senators Recto and Laurel Room of the Philippine Senate.
The event is also in partnership with the Save Our Schools Network Mindanao and is in time for the 25th anniversary of the Senate employees association.
It also aims to raise funds for the Lumad communities and their schools.
Lapis is an organization advocating music as a tool in pursuit of the Filipino2019s aspiration for genuine change.
It invites composers and musicians to involve themselves, compose and sing about these issues and struggles.

ARCHCon 2015 convened at South Town Center, ARCHCon 2015 convened at South Town Center
Team KFC Bucket Meal, winner of the Pair Cosplay Competition.

THE two-day ARCHCon  2015 was convened at South Town Center, Talisay City, from October 24 to October 25.
It was attended by artists, gamers, cosplayers, exhibitors, collectors, TCG players, and anime and gaming enthusiasts.
The first day of the event commenced with exhibits from hobbyists and cosplayers doing impressions of a variety of characters from animes, games and movies.
The exhibitors were from Computer Enthusiasts and Builders United  , Gunpla Addiction Cebu , Visayas Anime Figure Collectors , Da Geek Squad , Nintendo Cebu Enthusiasts, and Overactive Ink.
Event highlights of the first day included VS Tournament Preliminary, performances and showcases from the different otaku and gaming groups within the region, talks on 2D animation, and the individual cosplay competition.
There were also raffles, prizes and giveaways that kept the fun atmosphere among the attendees and spectators.
It concluded with the awarding of Day 1 winners.
The second day started with a Sunday mass, which was followed by an exhibit from the artist alley.
Interview from gaming experts, renowned cosplayers and impressionists, performances, and 3D animation talks ensued, as well as the handing of prizes and giveaways.
Gunpla modelers and manga artists got to display their talents during the Gunpla Builders Cup and the Drawing Competition.
The gaming crowd and musing spectators were especially hyped up during the Monster Hunter, Pokemon, Card Game, Super Smash Bros.
and the Tekken Tag Tournament Finals where the participants smashed each other to bits with their high-level gaming knacks.

The two-day convention ended with the awarding of all winners and a closing ceremony.
ARCHCon was one of the first hobby conventions held in Cebu.
It aims to be an open venue where people can gather and have fun.
ARCHCon started way back July 24, 2004 and it is now on its 12th year.
It is organized by A.M.T.G.
Brigade, a club catering to hobbies.
The proceeds of the event will be given to the Sacred Heart School-Ateneo de Cebu Blue Plate Mission.

Tribute to Urbandub: Remembering the Cebuano Influence, Tribute to Urbandub: Remembering the Cebuano Influence
Local band 'Loop' performing covers of Urbandub songs from 'Influence'
IT WAS a night of music and nostalgia for everyone who came and spent their evening in KOA Treehouse on Gorordo Avenue, Cebu City, last October 17.
Urbandub fans and Cebuano local music enthusiasts alike gathered for the Urbandub Influence Cover Night, which was hosted by Escape Artist Productions and had featured local bands such as Capetown Claims, Tempest Ocean, Maria Campbell, The Line Divides, Shuffled and Loop.
The bands played songs from the 201cInfluence201d album of Urbandub, paying tribute to the critically-acclaimed album written more than a decade ago by one of Cebu2019s most influential bands.
201cTheir Urbandub2019s songs are a celebration to all Cebuanos, for me.
They have a different kind of element and effect on the audience,201d said Indy, the DJ and master of ceremony during the Cover Night, when asked why the event focused on paying tribute to Urbandub.
Bands performing in the Cover Night not only covered songs from Urbandub but also played some of their own original songs.
DJ Indy said this is a way for music artists to push themselves further and keep the local music spirit alive.
KOA Treehouse was crowded with spectators of all kinds, gathered to partake in the tribute to what many consider as one of the greatest Filipino albums of all time.
Entrance fee was at P100 per person with one free glass of beer.
The event was scheduled to start at 8:30 p.m.
but nearly all tables were already occupied before the event officially begun.
Bands started performing around 9:45 p.m.
and after every other band performance, trivia questions were asked and winners got T-shirts as prizes.
Tristan Pasia, of Escape Artist Productions, said the purpose of the Urbandub Influence Cover Night was to allow Cebuanos to celebrate one of the best bands to have ever emerged in the region.
201cMost Cebuanos already miss Urbandub.
We have already been planning this before and have talked to all the members of Urbandub.
We got a reply two months ago that they are okay with the idea of a cover event focusing on their album, so my production team and KOA decided to make it happen,201d said Pasia.
He added that another they also wanted to remind everyone, especially the youth, that Cebuano music is rooted and embedded on rock and roll or Bisrock and that that spirit is worth keeping and celebrating, rather than just focusing on the Western kind of music.
There was not a shortage of an audience at any time of the event, as people who left were replaced with more people who have decided to spend the night enjoying the live music, games, and of course, good food and drinks offered by KOA Treehouse.
The crowd cheered, applauded and even sang along to songs that have become all-too familiar to a lot of Cebuanos and even non-Cebuanos who are fans of Urbandbub and have followed them throughout their journey.
201cFor me, this event is also about nostalgia.
Urbandub has been around for more than a decade already.
Even if they have already disbanded, we Cebuanos should still celebrate them and their contribution to Cebuano music,201d said Carlos, one of the audiences.
Urbandub is a Cebu-based rock band that was formed back in 2000.
201cInfluence201d is its second album that was created in 2003.
It gained widespread popularity not only in Cebu but in the whole country.

Urbandub announced its disbandment last April 1, 2015 and held its last concert with the original members on May 9 earlier this year.

Gay Chinese-Filipino rapper debuts 1st single 'Ersh', Gay Chinese-Filipino rapper debuts 1st single 'Ersh'DAVID Wilde x Zeejacob, an experimental hip hop duo, released their first single, entitled "Ersh," on October 23 on Spotify, iTunes, Tidal, Deezer, Amazon.com, and more.
An accompanying lyric video is being released on YouTube the same day.
Watch this.
Ersh is a gay Cebuano slang word used to poke fun at rich people.
"'OMG! You guys! You know last year, when I spent that summer in Paris and we were on Champ Ely-ersh, ersh, ersh, ersh, ersh...' That's what gay people in my city hear when they listen to rich people," David said jokingly.
The verses are written first in English and gradually transition to Cebuano and Bali Bali/Ilab Ilab .
An English translation of the verses is offered in closed captions on the YouTube lyric video.
"I wrote it when I was venting about this user I had to see a lot of back then.
He was from out-of-town and always tried to make his life out to be glamorous but in reality, he was struggling to pay the rent and would take advantage of people I knew," David explained.
201cIt started out as a rant but the more I wrote, the more comedic it got.201d
David Wilde, an openly gay Chinese-Filipino rapper, makes up half of the duo with Zeejacob, a masked straight beatboxer.
The instrumentals consist primarily of filtered looped beats straight out of Zeejacob2019s mouth.
The newly formed pair is set to release a music video and fresh singles in the coming months.
For more information or inquiries, contact David Wilde at davidwildexzeejacob@gmail.com or mobile  011639173089868 or  00639173089868.
You may also visit the following links:
Facebook: fb.me/davidwildexzeejacob
Twitter/Instagram: @davidwetnwilde and @iamzeejacob
YouTube Lyric Video: https://youtu.be/QXeN2EG3OAo
Spotify Link: https://open.spotify.com/track/5O4wun2gRcHYjRaeUQ4AOf
iTunes Link: https://itunes.apple.com/ph/album/ersh-single/id1045993056

Masbad: Design, coffee and photography, Masbad: Design, coffee and photographyRoark L.
Masbad, Wacky Tech, On Design
If there2019s one thing that I remember from my web design class, it would be that mockups are essential tools and building them is part of the design process.
This isn2019t just true for designing website and web pages.
It remains true as well when one designs user interfaces for apps.

Good or great design never comes from out of thin air.
It2019s thought out.
It2019s tested.
It2019s taken apart then put back together again.
If you2019d be doing that in a live app, it2019d be costly.

I found this great article from a website that I often visit to help you nail down your process when doing mockups.
It2019s a bit of a read but it2019s totally worth the time.
Check the article here.
On Coffee
It2019s best to watch the video.


On Photography
I2019ve been a photographer on and off since I was in high school.
Several years back, I dove deep into it and feel in love with landscape photography.
There was a certain feeling of satisfaction being able to capture a non-repeatable moment of nature.

Being into landscape photography, we imagine taking a photograph of vast scapes in front of us.
We try to capture as much as we can in one frame.
Some of us will even resort to creating a panorama for a more dramatic feel.
The bottomline really is to go wide, ultra wide.
Hence, your need for an ultra wide lens.

An Outdoor Photographer article said it well: "When it comes to landscape photography, don't just think big, think wide!"
Find out what that really means.
Read that article in full and see where it leads you to.
Chevrolet launches the all-new 2016 Trax, Chevrolet launches the all-new 2016 TraxCHEVROLET Philippines welcomed another new vehicle to its selection of SUVs, with the recent launch of the new Trax.

The new crossover is hyped as an urban lifestyle vehicle because of its small but powerful and efficient engine, sporty design, comfort and convenient features, and digital connectivity through its onboard entertainment suite.
Quite fittingly, the 2016 Chevrolet Trax was unveiled at the country2019s hottest nightlife destination where summer spirit and club music come together.

Welcoming the 201cBoracay Blue201d Trax on stage was an entertainment and fashion show, featuring 2014 Hip hop International champion A-team, a parade of models, celebrities, and fashion, art and music influencers.
As for the Trax itself, it2019s powered by a 1.4-liter turbocharged engine which produces 140 PS and 200 Nm of torque, while still maintaining excellent fuel efficiency 2013- perfect for both city and long drives.
Inside is a spacious cabin with a flexible seating configuration that can accommodate camping awnings and lifestyle equipment like bikes and surfboards.
Passengers can connect their phones for hands-free use while in the car via Bluetooth.
The top-of-the-line model will be fitted with a MyLink entertainment system that allows mobile devices to stream music through the vehicle2019s sound system.
The 2016 Chevrolet Trax comes in two variants 2013 LS and the top-of-the-line LT, with a choice of nine vibrant colors.
Each vehicle will come with a five-year warranty and free three-year, 24/7 roadside assistance.

The LS is priced at around P998,888, while the LT is available at around P1,218,000.
Sales and deliveries of the all-new Trax will commence by November.
For more of Chevrolet, visit Chevrolet Pampanga along Jose Abad Santos Avenue, City of San Fernando Pampanga or call  963-3333 or 0918-854-2241.
Log on to www.LausAutoGroup.com! 
Philippines tops international math contest, Philippines tops international math contest
The medalists from the Philippines, Vietnam, Malaysia, Thailand and Indonesia  and champion Philippine Junior Team A  Jonathan Conrad Yu, Andrhea Angelina San Gabriel, Ryan Jericho Sy and Fedrick Lance Lim with Dr.
Isidro Aguilar, DepEd-Manila Division Superintendent Priscilla de Sagun, Dr.
Archieval Rodriguez and Dr.
Eduardo dela Cruz, dean of the Arellano University School of Education.

THE Philippines won the most medals and awards in the 2015 Challenge for Future Mathematicians  contest held in Manila from from October 26 to 29.
Contestants from Thailand, Malaysia, Indonesia, Vietnam and host Philippines competed in the competition, which was organized by the Philippine Board of Studies Foundation  headed by Robert Degolacion together with the Mathematics Trainers Guild-Philippines  under Dr.
Simon Chua and the Mathematics Development Academy of the Philippines  under Dr.
Archieval Rodriguez.
In the individual contest, the Philippines won eight gold, 12 silver and 22 bronze medals, followed by Vietnam with one gold, four silver and three bronze; Thailand with one gold, three silver and four bronze; Malaysia with one gold, three silver and two bronze; and Indonesia with one gold and nine bronze medals.
In the team competition, Malaysia won as champion in the Upper Primary level while the Philippines topped the Middle Primary and Junior divisions.
In total, Filipino kids won 53 medals and trophies in the competition.

The winners were awarded by Dr.
Isidro Aguilar, overall chairman of the organizing committee; Dr.
Priscilla de Sagun, schools division superintendent of the Department of Education-Manila; Dr.
Eduardo dela Cruz, dean of the Arellano University School of Education; and Dr.
Rodriguez.
Degolacion said the Filipino winners are:
Gold medalists
Jonathan Conrad Yu - Philippine Christian Gospel School
Fedrick Lance Lim - Zamboanga Chong Hua High School
Andrhea Angelina San Gabriel - University of Baguio Science High School
Ryan Jericho Sy - Chiang Kai Shek College
Alvann Walter Paredes Dy - St.
Jude Catholic School
Rovi Gabriel Dela Cruz - Pasig Catholic School
Deanne Gabrielle Algenio - Laguna College
Wesley Gavin Palomar - Falcon School
Silver medalists
Westin Darren Maceda - St.
Jude Catholic School
Daryll Carlsten Ko - St.
Stephen2019s High School
Oniluv Troy Tabujara - Falcon School
Audrey Gabriel Tan - Malayan High School of Science
Jeffrey Jan Jabaes - Pangasinan Universal Institute
Juan Rafael Landicho - Stonyhurst Southville International School
Martin Gabriel Lopez - First Asia Institute of Tech and Humanities
Christian Jacob Yap - St.
John2019s Institute
Sean Matthew Tan - Jubilee Christian Academy
Danela Kyla Maceda - St.
Jude Catholic School
Rikka Grace Sombiro - Solomon Integrated School De Iloilo
Robert Frederik Uy - St.
John2019s Institute
Bronze medalists
Kristin Angela Narag - Philippine Science High School-Main
Matthew Shawn Tansiongkun - Xavier School
Gabrielle Jackie Candano - Aquinas University of Legazpi Science High School
John Ian Lenix Hingan - San Beda College-Alabang
Vince Edward Lacson - Makati Science High School
John Florence Dizon - Calamba Elementary School
Jared Eligio - St.
Francis of Assisi College
Marie Emmanuelle Martinez - UP Integrated School
Jerome Samuel Tan - Makati Hope Christian School
Luke Sebastian Sy - Grace Christian College
Sophia Monique Chan - Zamboanga Chong Hua High School
Shanna Camille Tiampong - Iloilo Scholastic Academy
Zoe Angeli Uy - St.
Jude Catholic School
Martin Rye Belino - Special Education Center for the Gifted
Lyonel Justin Ching - Jubille Christian Academy
Rickson Caleb Tan - MGC New Life Christian Academy
Filbert Joseph Ubanos - Elizabeth Seton School
Clarissa Lois Dalian - Precious International School of Davao
James Martin Young - SPED-ISEC
Marianne Casugbo - Hua Siong College of Iloilo
Enrico Miguel Del Rosario - Assumption Iloilo
Kent Vincent Gale - Precious International School of Davao
Team competition
Middle Primary Division
Philippine Team E - Champion
Philippine Team C- First Runner-up
Philippine Team B - First Runner-up
Malaysia Team A - Second Runner-up
Philippine Team D - Second Runner-up
Indonesia Team A - Second Runner-up
Thailand Team A - Second Runner-up
Upper Primary Division
Malaysia Team A - Champion
Philippine Team C - First Runner-up
Philippine Team D - First Runner-up
Thailand Team A - Second Runner-up
Indonesia Team A - Second Runner-up
Philippine Team E - Second Runner-up
Junior Division
Philippine Team A - Champion
Vietnam Team A - First Runner-up
Philippine Team B - First Runner-up
Philippine Team C - Second Runner-up
Philippine Team D - Second Runner-up
Vietnam Team B - Second Runner-up

To dream, to invent, To dream, to inventChristine Joice C.
Cudis, ALL developments in technology that we are experiencing today are because of inventions created from necessity; indeed, the world owes what it has to the brilliance of inventors.

How were inventors born? The answer: they are not.
Inventors are nurtured during their growing years.
Like Jose Guardo Jr., a 44-year-old Dabawenyo, whose invention of a Magnetic levitation train system is making currently making waves.
The technology used by Guardo, if funded by the government will be the third in the world following Germany's Inter City Express train and Japan's Shinkansen bullet train.
His invention was already patented in the World Intellectual Property Organization .
The MagLev technology will use lesser amount of electricity as compared to the Light Rail Transit  and Manila Rail Transit in Metro Manila.
This is because of the absence of metal to metal contact which means there is lesser friction and less energy is required during its operation.

There is no need for diesel for it to function as it is powered by permanent magnets which will cause the train to float.
It will also solve the problem on traffic of the country as the design of its terminal will house a parking space for those commuters who have cars.
The commuters can leave their cars at the space when they ride the MagLev train, whose rail will pass through the main offices and universities of the working people.
As of now, Guardo is hoping for the approval of the 29 million budget from the office the Department of Science and Technology-Technology Application and Promotion Institute  to create the usable six-seater prototype of the invention which will be placed at the Mindanao Science and Technology Centrum to attract more sponsors.
Guardo shared during the interview that one of the major influences he got was from watching science fiction movies.
"I was amazed as a kid when I watched the levitating vehicles in Star Wars: Return of the Jedi," Guardo said.
He added that when he was younger, he was already exposed to the machines as his father is handling different types of business.
"When I was in high school, I was already sketching levitating cars which my classmates would laugh at because they have no wheels," he said.
He believes that his idea may be a long shot but those who discourage him cannot stop him from dreaming.
"Steve Jobs, Bill Gates, and Mark Zuckerberg also went through the same challenges but they did not give up because they know that they are bound to make a difference - a good one."
Guardo also encourages the youth to use all the resources to learn.
"The youth should never stop learning.
Continue reading science books," he said.
There are a lot of things to watch out for from Guardo and one of the most recent is him opening the ACES Philippine Research Institute MagLev Energy, Engineering and Experiments.
"I want them  to be the next engineers, we need to pass this valuable legacy that is knowledge."
Strange encounters, Strange encountersRiain Alfonso, IT2019S that time of the year again when the telling and retelling of horror stories quite abound.
 
Of course, Cagayan de Oro City has its share of the supernatural or the unexplainable.
We have several noted haunted houses, schools, buildings, and cemeteries in the city and every single Kagay-anon probably has had at least one encounter with the things that go bumping in the night.
Here are some stories that were personally shared to the writer.
THE MISSED CALL
Cristina, not her real name as she requested anonymity, volunteered to be left alone in their house in Carmen while her entire family went to visit their dead at Divine Shepherd.
It was All Souls Day and they couldn2019t just all go for fear of burglars and other opportunistic hooligans.
Nobody else wanted to volunteer to watch over their place alone as it was rumored to be haunted and because it was that time of year when spirits are said to roam free.
 Cristina saw herself as one tough cookie and so she readily stepped up for the job.
The house is quite and has been standing for more than 35 years already.
The family has had several creepy experiences in the past, of things moving on their own when nobody was around, of weird sounds and phantom footsteps from the second floor, and of feeling a presence nearby sometimes.
In fact, several visitors claim to feel a bit 2018heavy2019 when visiting and their own labandera even refuses to enter the house.
 Cristina doesn2019t really mind the stories although she admits to sometimes feeling as if someone is watching even if she knows that nobody else is around.
After her family left, she got herself a snack and settled in front of their TV in the living room to binge-watch her favorite series.
Several hours into her series marathon, she heard her company, left in her room on the second floor, ring.
201cI ignored the call.
I mean, it was a holiday and I knew for a fact that there was no emergency at the office,201d Cristina said.
 
So, she continued with her marathon.
After a while, she went up to her room to check on the phone.
She got the shock of her life when she saw the number listed on the recent missed calls.
It was the company cell phone calling itself.
201cI just stared at it for some time then I checked again.
But still, no change.
The phone called itself.
I mean, that2019s not even possible, right?201d
In a daze with mounting fear, she went back to their living room and tried focusing on what she was watching, praying that her family would return soon.
201cI couldn2019t tell the family at first, kasi hadlukan kaayo sila.201d
THE HAUNTED MULTICAB AND THE FOOTSTEPS IN THE WATER
Fifty-eight-year-old Jocelyn Salvo, born and raised in the city, has been living her whole life in Tambo, Macasandig.
During Typhoon Sendong, her entire two-story house was submerged in water.
She and her family had to climb to the roof of their neighbor2019s house, which was just slightly higher than her own, to escape the rushing floodwaters.

They, and several other families in their area, were stuck there for almost 12 hours before it was safe enough to come down.
Some of her neighbors, however, weren2019t so lucky.
It was indeed a immense tragedy for her, having lost not only material possession but also a sister-in-law and several good friends in the neighborhood.
But, like most Filipinos, Jocelyn is made of sterner stuff.
The resilient grandmother picked herself up, literally wrung out the floodwater from her clothes, and started rebuilding the things that were destroyed by the calamity.
Two days after Sendong struck, she and her family went back to their house to start cleaning and salvaging the things that can still be of used.
Their house was pretty banged up; the backyard was even still submerged in knee-deep water at some parts.
They2019d work from sunup to sundown, returning to the evacuation center each night to rest.
They did this until their house was again habitable and they could return to it.

She shared how, when one night they were not able to return and had to campout in their still damaged house, she and her family heard footfalls from their backyard.

It was like several people were walking in the wet and muddy yard, she recounts, and that they can hear the sound of swishing water, as if being disturbed by a leg or a foot.
 
201cKanang among luyo, kay ubos man, naa pa jud tubig.
Nabati jud namo nga naay naglasak-lasak sa among likod, kana bitaw sound kung naay mutunob sa tubig,201d said Jocelyn, 201cPero inig tan-awon namo, walay tao sa among likod.201d
She also shared how a multicab, owned by a neighbor who perished during the flood, would start up all of a sudden, even if there were no one around to turn the ignition on.
 
201cKada na gani mag-ilog ang kahayag ug kangitngit, muandar lang ug kalit ang multicab.
 Kana pa jud andar nga murag suko bitaw.
Bisan naa na mi, naa nay tao magtan-aw, mag obserbar, muandar jud siya.201d  
What2019s even more perplexing is the fact that the multicab was submerged during the flood and that it would still turn on even without the battery attached.

201cBefore Sendong, wala man mi naka-experience ug mga ingon ato sa una, after ra man sa Sendong.
Pero pagkahuman to ni labay ang procession diri samo padulong sa misa sa Cala-cala, na undang man pod ang mga gaparamdam.
Siguro kay wala pa nahimutang ilang mga kalag kay wala pa sila nakaandam, mao naay mga ingon ato na gakahitabo diri sa amo.
Karon wala na man pod,201d she added.
CEMETERY TALES
Randolph Fuentes, the acting supervisor of the City Memorial Park in Bolonsori, Camaman-an, said that since 1982 there are more or less 50,000 of the city2019s departed buried in the cemetery.

201cPuno-puno jud diri, magpi-ot jud labi na pag November 1 ug November 2,201d Fuentes said.

With that many dead people buried in one place, it is no wonder that Bolonsori is the setting for some of the scariest ghost stories.
He said that although he himself has no personal experience, his fellow caretakers have shared with him their own goosebump tales of phantom footsteps, long shadows where there shouldn2019t be any, and inanimate object moving or falling on their own.
201cKami ang gipabantay diri sa kung asa gadagkot ug kandila diri sa likod sa simbahan,201d shared Bakang Hamlang, 201cAtong October 29, mga 10 sa gabii, imbes hapit na mi mahuman diri ug taod sa estalar, sa among stand diri, naa mi2019y na dungan dira sa sulod sa opisina.201d 
The Administrative Office of the cemetery is located just beside the cemetery chapel, and he said that they heard footsteps inside the office, 201cMurag naay tao sa sulod.
 Pirmero, murag naay galakaw-lakaw, ikaduha dayun, naa nay gatingog sa mga lamesa,201d until he said that it sounded as if there were people in the office working when they knew for sure that there was nobody inside.
Drawers were being pulled open, papers being shuffled, and chairs being dragged across the floor, 201cGrabe nako ka kulba-an bisag taga diri na gani mi.
Tinu-od jud diay ilang mga ginasulti na naa jud gatiaw.201d
201cTaga diri jud mi sa Bolonsori.
10 years na mi diri, dira sa ibabaw sa sementeryo among balay,201d said Emily Dosol, 40 years old, adding, 201cKanang magsalod mi sa gripo dira sa tapad sa chapel, mga ala-una, alas dos sa kadlawon, usahay naa mi makit-an, usahay gapanawag sila, musitsit.201d  
She shared how one time, she and two of her neighbors saw an entire family, a father, a mother, and their child, all dressed in white, came out of the chapel and floated toward the entrance of the cemetery.
 
201cNaka puti silang tulo ug abi namo naglakaw sila, pero pag tan-awon namo ang ilang ubos, wala diay sila galakaw, naglutaw sila sa hangin.
Amo lang pod sila gilantaw, wala na mi kalihok kay syempre, nakuyawan pod mi.201d
She also shared how, sometimes, the cries of the unclaimed Sendong victims buried behind the church would echo all over the cemetery, 201cMaglanog-lanog ilang mga hilak, naa pod mangayo ug tabang.201d  
This, coupled with the howls of the neighborhood dogs, would terrify anybody but she said that they2019re used to it already, 201cAnad na man mi, gapangumpra man gihapon ko ug kadlawon.
Mu-agi jud ko dira sa tunga sa sementeryo pero mao lagi, usahay naay manitsit, mu-ingon pa jud ug 2018hoy!2019201d
Kalinga: Of fulfilled dreams and permanence  , Kalinga: Of fulfilled dreams and permanence  
Mambabatok Apo Fang-od and Mj de Castro
MY HIGH school journals were full of wishes, of to-do lists before I get old.
Mundane things such as watching all Harry Potter movies in one day, cliff diving, learn how to sing a foreign song.
  But there were also wishes that would seem almost unmanageable to do, at least in this lifetime.
One of them was to get my first tattoo done by Apo Fang-od, the oldest mambabatok in the Philippines.
But I was sick of dreams that would remain just that--something you would only daydream about during a boring class or a meeting; and so booked a ticket to Manila with my best friend Kia, and went to see the cultural icon that is Apo Fang-od.

Before I start telling you about my adventure, let me tell you first that it hurt.
It was the worst form of pain I subjected myself into.
Pomelo thorn banging through your skin five times per second is not really my idea of fun.
But I would do it again in a heartbeat.

The moment we arrived at the bus station, I was so excited about the trip that I could not breathe properly.
I remember thinking years of waiting had finally come to this, an unkempt bus station with broken plastic chairs and staff that would call you 201cmadam.201d The first leg of our trip is finally about to happen! But life has a funny way of playing jokes on overly-excited people.
What welcomed us was a dreadful handwritten sign saying all trips of the day going to Tabuk were already fully booked.

Crap.
Taking the bus on another day was not an option because we would miss our flight back home.
 
I wish I could tell you I stood my ground and never wished for people who originally booked their tickets that day to miss their bus, but I did.
Lining up at the chance passenger line for five hours has a strange way of making you feel desperate.
When the bus finally came, Kia and I were lucky enough to be a chance passenger.
I have never looked forward more to a butt-numbing 10-hour bus ride as much as I did that night.

We arrived at Tabuk at the wee hours of morning, groggy and drained.
We met three other girls who were also on their way to see Fang-od.
Marionne, who headed up north to forget something , and Kim and Valerie, sisters who sneaked away from the hassle of Manila for the weekend.
 
The jeepney that would eventually take us to Tinglayan was already there.
It was a big heap of green metal that looked like it had seen better days.
 I knew the road would be difficult, but a strange fellow on the internet advised us to ride the jeep top load; and so we did the most rational thing to do, which is to follow a stranger2019s advice and climb on top of the jeepney beside packs of soft drinks, hoses, plywood, and LPGs.
 
Turns out, taking the advice was the right thing to do.
The view was truly better on top.
We passed through rough roads, cliffs, and harsh curves.
And despite the dangers of the road and the smoking locals  we felt at ease.
Three hours later, I was more than happy to arrive at the village of Tinglayan where our guide would meet us.
 
Francis Pa-In, a joyful man in his 50s,who never runs out of anything to say welcomed and accompanied us to a restaurant where we could eat our lunch.
He showed us his tattoo done by Fang-od, which resembles the Sleeping Beauty, a famous mountain that looked like its namesake.
 The roads were just cleared from the landslide that occurred because of the recent storm.
After lunch, we were on board the jeep again to take us to the starting point of our hike.

For someone like me whose idea of exercise is breathing, hiking is such a challenge.
Just when I thought that nothing could be worse than traversing pathways that were almost as narrow as a ruler, it rained.
An hour and a half of uphill trek became more than two hours.
My heartbeat was ringing in my ears, and my feet were ridden with mud.
 
But when I saw the village of the Butbut tribe, every inch of weariness was forgotten and was replaced with happiness.
When I got there, wet from the rain, catching my breath and all, Francis pointed to an old lady laughing at how tired I looked.
201cSi Fang-od,201d he shouted.
Her beauty was apparent even at her old age.
She was wearing a gray cardigan, and colorful accessories that were probably given to her by previous visitors.
 
I already knew her from photographs on the internet, but seeing her in person was an entirely different thing.
I could not believe that I was in the presence of someone who has been a master in her craft for more than 80 years, and is still practicing it.
Our host served us coffee which put Starbucks to shame.
Apo Fang-od arrived with an ice cream container of her tattoo paraphernalia.
 
I was up first.
 
Since Fang-od did not speak Filipino, Francis served as our translator.
I told him I wanted to get their tribe2019s symbol of a scorpion on my left rib.
Fang-od initially did not want to tattoo me on my rib because the spot was too painful but being the hardheaded girl that I am, I insisted and thankfully, she agreed.
The first time the thorn hit my skin, I knew she was right.
All I could hear was the sound of the bamboo hammer, I could even feel the thorn getting stuck on my skin at times.
I was bleeding profusely and my rib was already throbbing.
The other girls kept asking me if it was painful and all I could do was nod.
At times when she would stop to get more ink on the thorn or draw the pattern, I would breathe deep to prepare myself for another minute or two of excruciating pain.
 
The only way I could keep up with the sting was yelling  rock songs in my head as I was trying to match each puncture with the hard beat.
My rib was sore and bloody, but my thoughts were peaceful as I realized how privileged and humbled I was to have a mark of a living legend.
 
After we got our tattoos done, the locals constantly told us jokes and different stories about their tribe over dinner and cup of coffee.
The people spoke a different dialect that I could not understand and lived a life completely different from the one I have, but, I felt right at home.
  We met Grace, Fang-od2019s apprentice, in the morning.
She was a ray of sunlight; she really knew how to brighten the mood of people around her; and because she spoke Tagalog, it was easier to communicate with her.
 
We had not originally intended to get a tattoo from Grace, but it felt right and so we went with the flow.
Besides, what2019s a few minutes of pain to a lifetime of bearing a beautiful art piece on your body? All of us were going through their books searching on what tattoo to get from Grace, and I decided on a small crescent moon on my upper back and Kia had waves on her lower back to remind her how the sea brought her peace.
Undoubtedly, Grace was gentler than Fang-od when it came to tattooing.
Her hand was lighter and she would talk to us while getting our tattoos done.
Grace had been tattooing since she was 10 years old and now that she2019s 19, she plans on following the footsteps of Fang-od.
But just like any other journey, ours had to end too.
After we said our goodbyes, we handed out matches to the people.
It2019s heartwarming to see people smiling and being thankful for a simple thing like that.
 
Two days on the village was too short.
The place and its people found their way to my heart and it2019s something I would never forget.
The journey made me reconnect with nature and our culture.
Three newfound friends, and two beautiful scars later, I have grown a drive to encourage people to experience what I had during my journey to Fang-od.

A spirited passion for healthy food, A spirited passion for healthy food
OF WORDS AND FOOD.
With her blog, Babe for Food, Justinne Lou Go translated her love for food into articles.
This was four years ago, just before she took up nutrition and dietetics in college, which she pursued after taking up culinary arts.
Deneb R.
Batucan, Food lover Justinne Lou Go casts a delectable spell
, WHEN it comes to anything and everything about food, Justinne Lou Go is the perfect person to follow.
She takes being a foodie to the next level as a food blogger, a chef and a nutritionist.
For Justinne, food is what makes her world go round.
More on Justinne Lou Go's story in Sun.Star Weekend's November 1, 2015 issue.
Click here to read more.
Career advice for students goes virtual at Edukasyon.ph , Career advice for students goes virtual at Edukasyon.ph 
Screenshot from Edukasyon.ph
SOCIAL enterprise Edukasyon.ph has introduced an online career platform where high school students can get career advice for dream jobs and the education that they need to get there.

The site offers a diverse set of career options with free access to a database of 5,300 colleges and universities, 300 Senior High-ready schools, 50,000 courses, and 2,800 scholarships offered in the Philippines and abroad.

201cWe understand how frustrating it can be for our high school students to figure out what kind of jobs they want to be doing when they grow up.
 Edukasyon.ph can help young students map out the education they need depending on the careers they can imagine themselves to be doing,201d said Edukasyon.ph chief executive officer Linartes Viloria.
Students can simply find schools and scholarships just by registering at www.edukasyon.ph.
 As soon as they register they can click on career options, get updates on higher academic opportunities that correspond to their interests, preferred locality, and tuition budget.

To bring the website closer to the students, Edukasyon.ph has been conducting career clinics at high schools all over the Philippines.
It has visited 27 public high schools in the National Capital Region including the cities of Marikina, Manila, Pasig, San Juan, Taguig, and Valenzuela.

201cStudents all over the Philippines should have access to this information that can change the way they're planning their education and eventually their lives.
We want them to know the opportunities out there, so they can make better choices,201d said Henry Motte-Munoz, Founder, Edukasyon.ph.
In October 2015, Edukasyon.ph concluded its first wave of regional Career Clinic Caravan in Baguio City.
This activity was organized through the assistance of volunteers from National Youth Commission Northern Luzon, UP Subol Society, and UP Baguio Rotaract Club.
In the next few months, Edukasyon.ph is scheduled to be visiting high schools in key areas in Cebu, Bacolod, Dumaguete, Davao, and in other key cities in Regions 3, 4, 6.
201cWe are happy to be working with government, the private sector and volunteer organizations in bringing education information closer to our students.
 The responsibility of educating students on careers do not lie solely on our schools.
 It is a responsibility that we all share and we should work together on,201d said Edukasyon.ph founder Henry Motte-Munoz.
Under its volunteer program, Edukasyon.ph accepts volunteers from organizations nationwide who are willing to help in its regional career clinics all over the Philippines.

PhiSci Central Luzon conducts 6th PhiSciCLaban, PhiSci Central Luzon conducts 6th PhiSciCLabanPrincess Clea Arcellaz, ANGELES CITY -- The Philippine Science High School  Central Luzon campus recently held their annual regional quiz bee to showcase the academic skills of the youth in the region.
The sixth PhiSciCLaban is the general academic quiz contest for public and private elementary schools of Region III spearheaded by PhiSci.
The contest is composed of three segments: qualifying, semi-final and final round under the category of Science, Mathematics, Language and Literature, History, General Information and Trivia.
Around 60 schools all over the region participated in the said schools with one team per school consisting of one Grade VI and three Grade V students.
The overall champion in the academic contest was awarded to Special Education Center for the Gifted in Olongapo City, Zambales.
The first runner-up is the City College of the Holy Spirit of Tarlac and and Kalalake Elementary School-Center of Excellence and Tarlac Montessori School are second and third runners-up respectively.
PhiSci also awarded the Individual High Scorers in the qualifying round.

Awardees are Michael John Gaspar, Alyssa Joyce Segundo, Roxanne Bangsil, John Audric Ayuban, Christen Noceda, Martin Rey Belino, Keith Railey Reyes, Josh Tomacruz and Tristan Hernandez.
Head Organizer Jed Aries Castro clarified that awardees in the said contest will not be automatically admitted in their institute.
"In order to be admitted in the institute, students must take and pass the national competitive exam administered by the national office so there'll be no bearing whether you win here or not," he said.
Castro added that the contest is for to the region only since the institute did not yet coordinate with other regions as well as in the national level.
10 Things to Love about Chevrolet Colorado, 10 Things to Love about Chevrolet Colorado
Known as a strong pickup truck from Chevrolet, the Colorado was built to respond to the lifestyle needs of cross-country enthusiasts.
KNOWN as a strong pickup truck from Chevrolet, the Colorado was built to respond to the lifestyle needs of cross-country enthusiasts.
Its new features offer more off-road capabilities to face any rough road adventure.

Here are 10 things to love about the Chevrolet Colorado:
1.
Second generation Duramax Engine with Commonrail Direct Injection , electronically controlled VGTi that produces best-in-class 500 Nm of torque and 200 hp
2.
Get instant parking assistance with the standard Reverse Camera
3.
One-ton payload capable truck with 8-point crossmember ladder chassis configuration matched with high ground clearance
4.
Z71 high-stance suspension, 2-inch lift kit, and snorkel let you cross up to 880 mm of water at a max speed of 7 kph
5.
Electronic Drive Mode Select  allows you to shift on the fly to either 4WD Hi or 4WD Lo when negotiating challenging terrain
6.
Re-tuned 6-Speed Automatic Transmission with Active Select and new 6-Speed Manual shifter result in optimal on-road power and excellent fuel efficiency
7.
Projector headlamps paired with LED tail lights combine good looks with functionality.
8.
Record your road trips with the Dash Cam and enjoy technology at your fingertips with the Chevrolet MyLink touchscreen display.
9.
More than enough room to comfortably accommodate passengers and cargo with its spacious cabin, generous legroom, and 30 storage spaces.
10.
Driver Information Center keeps you informed of vital vehicle information in real-time.
For inquiries visit Chevrolet Pampanga along Jose Abad Santos Avenue, City of San Fernando Pampanga or call  963-3333 or 0918-854-2241.
Log on to www.LausAutoGroup.com! 
WATCH: SM Seaside City, Robinsons Galleria Cebu almost complete, WATCH: SM Seaside City, Robinsons Galleria Cebu almost completeDaryl D.
Anunciado, EXCITED for the opening of two of Cebu's grand shopping malls?
Here's the latest video showing the progress of the construction of SM Seaside City Cebu and Robinsons Galleria Cebu.
The two malls are target to be completed before the end of 2015.
Robinsons
Robinsons Galleria Cebu is a six-storey mall that stands on a 4.7-hectare lot along General Maxilom Ave.
in the Cebu City North Reclamation Area.

Robinsons Galleria Cebu is the second mall carrying the flagship brand after Robinsons Galleria Manila.
It is the group2019s 41st shopping mall and is the firm2019s third shopping center in Cebu.

Robinsons Galleria Cebu is dubbed as the country2019s first garden mall, as it adopts a green architectural design.
It will also have six cinemas, including two 3D theaters with a total seating capacity of 1,774.

SM
SM Seaside City will be the fourth largest SM mall in the country, having a gross floor area of 470,000 square meters.
SM2019s biggest malls are SM Megamall , SM North Edsa , and SM Mall of Asia .
The mall will have a 148-meter tower, the first of its kind in the region, that offers a breathtaking 360-degree view of Cebu.
Aside from its retail component, SM Seaside City will also have entertainment and lifestyle areas.
These include the Seaside Tower, a 148-meter structure with a viewing deck that offers a 360-degree view of Cebu with restaurants and bars on the side to complement the experience; and the Sky Park, an elevated area in the mall set in the midst of foliage and water features complemented by dining choices.
There will also be a full-sized ice skating rink, cinemas and a bowling center.

Raging on     , Raging on     Karina V.
Canedo, A BETTER life and a sustainable environment is what the 70-year-old Conchita Masin dreamed of.
 
A strong leader with strong environmental advocacies, Masin leads her community Barangay Ngan and Governor Genoroso in the protection of marine resources and against mining developments while instilling the value of education and awareness among children of all levels.

Born in Leyte, Masin first arrived in Governor Generoso when she was 30.
She volunteered in constructing the barangay high school, which spared her children from having to walk 15 kilometers to school every day.
 
She had also been a barangay nutrition scholar during the Marcos regime, and a day care worker after.
Masin during these years discovered her leadership skills can really draw people to cooperate with her plans for development.

201cBisan unsa pa ang akong planong buhaton, para sa kalambuan naa gyu2019y muuban jud nako ,201d Masin said adding that all her endeavors turned out well.
 While Governor Generoso is not her birthplace, she admits falling in love with its rich natural resources, be it land and sea.
 
She had been Municipal Environmental Monitoring Team CSO representative, which had given her power to confiscate stop truckloads of chromites mined in their area.
She added that during that time threats came upon her but she was undaunted as she thinks that only God can decide on her life.

201cMaybe you will not believe but when I advocated against mining, we were able to hold truckloads of mineral resource with only citizen2019s arrest, without police.
It was documented.
I got really scared when the helper went down.
I don2019t know if he had firearms, I was really brave facing them knowing I only have with me were female tricycle drivers),201d Masin recounted.

She said that she was not afraid of anything because she knows she stands on her advocacy and that is her weapon.

201cIt2019s not about being lax.
It2019s about the strong belief in our cause, because I lead the advocacy, that is my weapon until now.
All of us will go through that.
We have different roads, it may be for the sea, it may be for the land, but I did not reach the point when I have to stop because I was afraid,201d Masin added.
 
Aside from mining, Masin who is now the chairman of the Agraryong Reporma Samahang Kababaihan at Governor Generoso, Davao Oriental was an active advocate of close season for fishing in the Davao Gulf.
She even joined the long walk along the shorelines of Davao Gulf to convince coastal municipalities to support the close season for fishing.

Masin also said that because of their campaign the fishes they are catching now are much more bigger compared before.
 
201cWe are thankful for the close season in Davao Gulf because now we catch fishes in greater number and bigger sizes),201d Masin said.

She said due to their increased production, people in the area are now embracing the law.
The 70-year-old women organization leader said that she was also active in reporting commercial fishing vehicles that fish around their municipal waters.
She added that that is only a little sacrifice for a bigger cause because so much will come back to them.

Masin also said that their group also provide alternative livelihood program for the fisherfolks such as coconut processing project, vegetable growing, and livestock.
 Their product such as coconut chips, coconut energy drink coconut vinegar are now sold in JS Gaisano Tagum and other stores.
 She added that they are just awaiting for FDA License to export their products to Korea.
She added that their group composed of 168 women working hand in hand in their projects under her leadership.

These are just among the projects that Masin is currently undertaking.
201cLabaw pa biya sa one million ang akong sweldo,201d she said in describing what she is getting back in return as she tried to quantify how much a lush environment and natural resources cost.

201cWala man koy ikabayad ug balik sa Ginoo sa gihatag niyag tubig na akong gina-inom, ug sa hangin na akong maginhawa ,201d Masin.

She said that, her only joy is after every problem she solves is the feeling that she is like a Queen.

201cAfter the pains after the struggle comes success mura ka anag Queen Elizabeth, considering perti man jud ka ka yano ,201d Masin said.
XU-GLI shares on barangay health governance in MisOr town, XU-GLI shares on barangay health governance in MisOr townTHE Governance and Leadership Institute  of Xavier University, in partnership with the Department of Health  and the local government of Kinoguitan, Misamis Oriental, conducted a barangay leadership and governance training-workshop at Kinoguitan2019s Panabol Summer House on October 15 to 16.
The two-day training covered the topics on the role of barangay governance in addressing health issues of the community, the functions of the Barangay Health Board, how to achieve effective communication and quality information, and understanding the Three Health Delays Model.
As a framework for examining maternal mortality, the Three Delays Model recognizes the different hurdles women face in achieving the effective medical care needed to prevent deaths occurring in pregnancy and childbirth.
The said model, according to Maternal Worldwide, identifies three major factors which may impede women and girls in accessing the levels of maternal health care which they need: Delay in decision to seek care; Delay in reaching care; and Delay in receiving adequate health care.
The session drew together the barangay chairpersons, councilors for health and barangay health workers of Kinoguitan.
The development management officers of DOH 10 served as technical assistants for the training.
201cWe recognized the need to strengthen the barangays in order to better deliver our health services,201d said Dr.
Siegfried Hector Razo, Kinoguitan2019s municipal health officer.

Kinoguitan is a fifth class municipality in the province of Misamis Oriental with a population of 12,761 people based on the 2010 census.

Camiguin woman insists gender equality, Camiguin woman insists gender equalityCATARMAN, Camiguin 2013 Rising above any adversity is a daunting task for most people; it takes sheer will and determination, and a little help from your community.
Northern Mindanao Region has come a long way in empowering women and instill the volunteerism in the communities.
Charina Torayno, 34, from Purok 4, Kompol, Catarman town, is a Pantawid Pamilya parent leader who was chosen by fellow volunteers as chairperson for the organized Barangay Sub-project Management Committee that implements projects under the Department of Social Welfare and Development program 2013the Kapit-Bisig Laban sa Kahirapan Comprehensive and Integrated Delivery of Social Services 2013 National Community Driven Development Program .

Despite the stereotyping and resource limitations, Charina together with women beneficiaries of Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program , implemented the construction of a multi-purpose building which would serve as the barangay center of her village as an evacuation center during calamities.
Charina2019s participation in the construction of the barangay hall made her realize that women can be agents of change and eventually help in protecting the vulnerable members of society such as the elderly, women, children, and persons with disability.
"It is only through gender equality that women can help promote economic growth and alleviate poverty," stressed Charina, who also joins other women and men in her village in putting sands on sacks, piling hollow blocks, and mixing cement with aggregates during the construction of the building.
201cBefore, I would only stay at home struggling to make ends meet,201d Charina said, adding, 201cI will not bother to participate in any activities in school and in our community.201d
Charina furthered, 201cwala ko magdahom sa dako nga responsibilidad  but insisted that women like her can manage and do the tasks usually done by men.)201d 
Charina said her husband is also supportive, and added that some of her fellow volunteers had doubts if they could finish the tasks, but she insisted to them 201ckaya ra ni ninyo, kay nagseminar baya ta ani .201d
Empowerment
Charina revealed that her volunteer work led her to do almost all construction management tasks.
She also admitted that before the actual work that she did not know some of the terminologies in the construction industry.
She, however, was enlightened during the seminars.

Charina2019s tasks during the project were to organize the volunteers and served as manager.
She also revealed that she has earned the respect of her peers and fellow volunteers as the project progressed.
Charina also said that she was very hands-on during the construction by actively doing follow-ups on deliverables; she also said that she was relatively strict and non-complacent.
She insisted helping out in tasks usually given to their male counterparts, like cement mixing and segregation of aggregates and sand, but also admits that there are certain tasks that she cannot do like bending of steel materials.
After three months of construction work, Charina and her fellow village volunteers finished the building.
201cWe feel proud, this is a nice office, and during calamities, this will serve as an evacuation center and this place is also safe from floods.201d
Home and family
Charina said that despite the three-month-long construction work, she still managed to do all her daily tasks as a parent.
She shared that her usual routine is cooked meals and prepares her husband2019s things the night before so her husband can get ready for work faster, bathes her twin 2-year-old daughters, prepares milk, cooks for noontime and dinner meals, and while she constantly communicates with her fellow Pantawid Pamilya members.

Charina also said that the DSWD programs like Pantawid Pamilya and the Family Development Session really boosted her confidence as a woman and a mother.
She revealed that these programs helped her to manage her home and finances.
Now, their family can have savings, payment for school fees, and most especially for the wellbeing of her children.
Charina said that through these DSWD integrated programs she now has full confidence in her daily lifestyle and said that she has also gained the respect of others and more importantly 2013 the sense of self-respect.

From PCOS to OMR , From PCOS to OMR Kriztja Marae G.
Labrador, BEFORE the 2010 elections, voters had to fill up ballots and drop these in the metal ballot boxes in their precincts.
This has changed, except for some remote areas, with the introduction of computerized voting in 2010 and 2013.
With the automated election system stipulated in Republic Act 9369, voters now only have to shade the oval and feed it to a voting machine which automatically counts each ballot.
 
From using Smartmatic's precinct count optical scan  as the vote counting machine for next year's polls the Commission on Elections had announced last August that they will be leasing an entire set of machine called an optical mark reader  still from the company.
This has been the office's decision due to the lack of time to refurbish the machines used in the last polls.
JUST THE NAME
Comelec Davao regional director lawyer Remlane Tambuang said that both PCOS and OMR use the same technology and that the name was just changed to distinguish OMR from its predecessor.
The main difference, OMR is running on newer software.
Reports show, that the government will be leasing around 94,000 new OMRs which amounts to about  P7.9 billion which is more expensive than their original plan of refurbishing the 82,000 PCOS machines and leasing 23,000 new OMR machines for the cost of about P5 billion.
December last year Comelec already looked at that option and hired Smartmatic to repair the PCOS machines but was blocked by the Supreme Court  last April as it did not go through a public bidding.
As per the SC's order, Comelec opened bidding for the refurbishment of the old PCOS machines but no company took the offer.
It was then followed by another bidding last August 1 but only one company showed up and was not qualified for the project.
With that, the Comelec has arrived in its decision for the leasing of the OMR instead.
For Davao Region, Tambuang said that they have yet to finalize the number of the OMR machines needed by the end of November after they have identified the number of cluster precincts in the region.
Tambuang said that for the past two automated election system in the region, they have not received any glitches in their reports except for the incident in Nabunturan, Compostella Vallet, where the ballots were delivered to the wrong area with the same name.
MALL VOTING?
With the Comelec looking at mall voting for next year's elections, Tambuang said that there is still a need to "fine tune" the said set-up so as not to compromise the election.
Especially with regards to the security.
"We need to fine tune it  baka kasi mamaya piliin nila kung sino ang papasukin," he said explaining that only Comelec approved personnel should be present in the voting area.
As of October 19 electoral registration board  hearing, Davao Region has a total of 2,716,846 registered voters.
2016 elections: What's new? , 2016 elections: What's new? 
DAVAO.
Nothing can stop this man from exercising his right to vote.
 
Ace June Rell S.
Perez, COMPARED to the last national elections in 2010 when President Benigno Simeon C.
Aquino III was catapulted to presidency, a lot of new features, additions and changes were included for next year's elections, all in the effort of the Philippines' Commission on Elections  to come up better and more transparent and systematic electoral process.
No Bio, No Boto
In February 15, 2013, President Aquino had signed into law the Republic Act 10367 which mandates that "all voter registration records must have biometrics information," and those records of voters who have not updated or validated their biometrics information will be deactivated, thus will no longer eligible to vote in May 2016.
Biometrics data will be registered via biometric voter verification system  by using digital camera, a fingerprint scanner and a signature pad to capture the voters' biometrics data.

"Due to this new law, all previously registered voters without biometrics are required to subject themselves to biometrics capture through the validation procedure.
All concerned is given until 31 October 2015 to comply with this requirement," the Comelec website said.
This new biometrics requirement has led to the #NoBioNoBoto nationwide campaign, aimed to entice everyone to have their biometrics validated whether as old voters or new registrants.
The Comelec's Bid and Award Committee  said that the commission leased a total of 23,000 VVS units.
A VVS unit leasing fee costs P90,000.
With the new biometrics requirements, Comelec hired a total of 4,135 technical support workers to facilitate the technology.
Comelec had poured a total of P727.215 million for the new biometrics requirement, which as they described as their added transparency measure.
With the implementation of this new requirement, the commission was confronted with challenges such as accepting a huge and significant figure of Filipino voters who have not validated its biometrics data.
As of October 24, Comelec-Davao Region data bared that a total of 195,826 voters in the region still have no biometric validation, biggest bulk of it is coming from Davao City at 120,000 out of the city's 912,959 registered voters.
Comelec Davao deputy director lawyer Marlon Casquejo said in an interview with Sun.Star Davao that there are 2,211,275 registered voters in Davao Region, and some nine percent or 195,826 of that have no biometric validation.
"These nine percent of the total voters in Davao Region who are still non-validated with biometrics information is still significant," he said
He was quick to add that with the time constraints it is impossible to accommodate the remaining numbers.
"To be realistic, we cannot cope up with these numbers with the remaining days.
For every district, we can only accommodate an average of about 300 per day," Casquejo said.
Davao City is composed of three districts.
In a recent report, Casquejo added that there are 64,684 still have no biometric validation in the first district, 36,445 for second, and 26,244 for the third district.
Biometrics systems are significantly being introduced and deployed globally as part of the new system in a bid to ensure fair and efficient electoral process.
Malls partnership
For this upcoming 2016 Election, the Comelec had forged partnership with the country's leading mall operators as part of its efforts to provide the public convenience and better voting experience.
Only for this upcoming election, the Comelec in partnership with various malls had set up satellite voters' registration booths inside their respective malls.
Comelec Chairman Andy Bautista said in a  report that "the poll body decided to bring this service to malls to help some voters who find it "difficult or inconvenient" to register in their local Comelec offices."
Bautista cited that he saw no legal impediment to elections being held in malls.
It is stipulated in section 42 of the Omnibus Election Code that "public schools or any other public buildings within the barangay shall be used as polling places."
The mall-based voters' registration and biometrics validation were made available since July of 2015.
Some of the participating partner malls are Ayala, Robinsons, SM, and Walter Mart, among others.
In Davao City Gaisano Mall of Davao , SM City and SM Lanang Premiere, Abreeza Ayala Mall and NCCC Mall of Davao had set up its voter's registration booths to cater for the three districts in the city.
However, with this suggestion of the Comelec, nothing is final yet if the 'Mall Voting" will push through.
"Though it is part of our major concern to provide convenience to the public when voting, we still have to finalize and plan this because security is still of our paramount concern," Lawyer Remlane Tambuang, Comelec-Davao regional director said adding that only Comelec approved personnel should be present in the voting area.
First "Social Media Elections"
Election campaigns go beyond the tri-media, TV, Radio and Print, now is the "social media" season.
Indeed, we are living now in a digital era where emergence of various social media sites, which is influential and powerful tool of acquiring information, is inevitable.

Comelec, had released a statement in August that more than ad spaces online, Comelec will be imposing rules on campaigns aired and published on video sharing sites, blogs, and other social media platforms like Twitter, Facebook, and Instagram.

This,all of because social media is seen to play a significant role in elections next year.
Social media now is seen to be a platform that is accessible and most used as a source of information, which can be deciding factor for a voter's choice of candidate.
According to Nielsen survey, as of 2014, 57 percent of the country's total population uses internet, which can be translated to 58,690,221 internet Filipino users.
There are some 54 millio Filipino Facebook users, 11.9 million Twitter users and 7.3 million Tumblr users.
Advanced Automated Election System
Last August, Comelec announced that they will be leasing a total of  93,977 Optical Mark Reader  voting machines from Smartmatic-Total Information Management  Corporation to be used in the 2016 polls, the same company who provided the Precinct Count Optical Scan  machines which was used last presidential polls.
The commission unanimously decided to lease over 93,000 OMR machines for the 2016 elections
"The Commission believes that this is the most viable, practical and safest option to pursue in our efforts to ensure the credibility of the 2016 elections," Bautista said.
The machines, which is reported to be fully delivered in January 2016, should it be delivered on time, it seen to give the Comelec an ample time for testing and also new machines are expected to address problems encountered in 2010 and 2013 elections, with the PCOS.
With just over six months before judgment day on May 9, 2016, the people as voters will be divided in two.
First, between those old enough to vote and those too young to vote and those well informed to candidates' profiles and those who ride the cycle of bandwagon without self-assessment.
Second is between those registered to vote and those who are not.

One thing important for the public to inculcate in minds while voting is "We are to judge," but "Are we to blame?"
Creativity, CreativityRoark L.
Masbad, Wacky Tech, BEING creative and staying creative are two different things.

Staying creative can really be a toll on someone as it goes on.
I2019m sure you2019ve been stuck in one or few situations that involved your own creativity.
It could be a project for school, a poster design, a musical score, a song you2019re writing.
It can be anything, really.

I2019ll keep it quick this week.
Less than two minutes quick.

Here are some ways to stay in that zone.
What makes a nuisance? , What makes a nuisance? Ivy C.
Tejano, FILING of certificates of candidacy  for Philippine elections has become a source of entertainment to many as more than just the usual politicians beat the deadline for filing.

While in another facet of election realities in the Philippines, at least 18 past candidates face being perpetually barred after failing to submit their statements of election contributions and expenses  for two or more elections.

The list does not include known politicians nor anyone who won.
Commission on Elections  Davao Region deputy director Marlon Casquejo said even for local positions, a good number have filed their COCs for different positions in the 2016 elections.
Casquejo was quick to add that not all will be qualified.

At present, their law department is scrutinizing the COCs of all those who filed and checking on the background of the individuals.
What they are trying to do is weed out the nuisance candidates.
Nuisance candidates are those who filed their COC just to mock the election process, those who want to confuse the voters by using names similar to other candidates, and those who are not serious as manifested by the capability to launch a campaign.

"The law department has the control over the assessment of the COCs filed at Comelec office.
We will have the final list of candidates for the 2016 elections on December 10," Casquejo earlier said.

In Davao Region, at least 18 candidates face the prospect of being perpetually barred from seeking public office for failure to comply and submit their statements of election contributions and expenses  for two or more elections.

Of the 18 hopeful candidates, six are from Davao City, seven from Davao del Sur, three from Davao del Norte and two are from Compostela Valley.

In Davao City as candidates for the City Council member/House of Representatives First District 2007 to 2010 Bernard S.
Custodio; Anacleto B.
Millendez; Carlos J.
Cirilio; Rogelio A.
Montajes; Rogelio C.
Paconla; and Rodrigo J.
Sulamin.

For Compostela Valley 2014 Arturo A.
Marcojos from Maco town; and Vedorin M.
Takasan from Pantukan town, while in Davao del Norte2014Reynaldo P.
Alba and Rey B.
Perez, both from Tagum City; and Larry P.
Garcia from Panabo City.
In Davao del Sur 2014 Pablo C.
Villaber; Ronald L.
Banac; Kenn T.
Lacia and Cesar C.
Puerto, both from Matanao town; Tanada B.
Pinto from Santa Cruz town; Serafin D.
Calnapat and Leonardo Uy, both from Santa Maria town.
Commissioner Christian Robert Lim earlier said the list, which was released last October 23, is not yet final.
He added that another list will be released soon.
Based on the report, most of the candidates would be facing perpetual disqualification.
But it was not yet clear if this would be immediately implemented.

According to the Resolution 9991 or The Omnibus Rules on Campaign Finance, the Campaign Finance Office may file motu proprio petition to disqualify a candidate.

Rule 13 said among the grounds for disqualification is when a candidate failed to submit his statement of contribution and expenditures in relation to at least two elections.
The rule added that the failures in submitting the statements of election contributions and expenses don2019t need to be in consecutive elections.

Lim assured that they would strictly implement the campaign finance rules in the 2016 election.
He added that they will not extend the deadline for the filing of the SOCE for losing and winning candidates from May 10 to June 8, 2016.

The Comelec earlier recorded 4,667 candidates to include incumbent elected officials had been administratively fined for campaign finance reporting non-compliance in the 2013 elections, while 204 in 2010.
It all collected P52,300,518.
Resolution 9476 of the Comelec mandates that the filing of administrative sanction such as fine ranging from P10,000 to P60,000.
Women power, is there?   , Women power, is there?   Rhealyn C.
Pojas, PHILIPPINE laws recognize the role of women in nation-building but do the people do the same? 
Two Philippine women presidents later, women2019s rights advocates continue to drum up the plights of the marginalized sector especially for women to be given equal privileges in the right to choose a leader and to lead a government alike.
Section 14 of article two of the Philippine Constitution recognized 201cthe role of women in nation-building, and ensure the fundamental equality before the law of women and men.201d 
In an interview with Sun.Star Davao, Gabriela Davao City Secretary General Mary Ann Sapar said that while women in the country had been given equal right to suffrage and run for any position that they desired, women still cannot be considered well-represented in elections.

201cSa atong yugto although naa na2019y privilege ang mga babae nga modagan o dili, dili gihapon well-represented maski tan-awon nato sa kongreso karon ,201d Sapar said pointing out that even in congress, men far outnumber women.

For the 2016 national elections, there are women who had filed their Certificate of Candidacy  for the presidential position but if one would still look at the majority of those who have filed their COC; it is evident that the number is dominated by men, Sapar expressed.

Women are already said to be part of the forces towards change but since they are being considered as second class citizens whose fate lies inside the four corners of the house, they are hindered to take active participation in governance, Sapar added.

Sapar also narrated that even here in Davao City, one could also see that majority of the City Councilors are composed of men.
 
Gaining higher positions in the government still remains a struggle to women since it is more likely that men are chosen to have the higher positions.

In an effort to bring equality of men and women, certain laws were made and these are the Republic Act 9710 or Magna Carta of Women  which is there to help increase women2019s participation and representation in the government and the Republic Act 7192  among others, according to the Comelec website.
However, despite the existence of such laws, there is still a chink of women participation particularly in the governance aspect.

In the Comelec website, it was revealed that statistics per elective position by sex during the last May 2010 elections that the percentage of men candidates for the presidential seat is 88.89% which is way higher than the 11.11% of women candidates who ran for the same position.

For the Vice presidential seat, there was 87.50% of men candidates while only 12.50% for women.
The same is also true with the rest of the statistics shown on the Comelec site.

201cMen still has higher positions in the government that2019s why in Gabriela, we continue to convince women to recognize the potentials of their peers,201d Sapar said.

201cWomen were not only given opportunities to vote for their ideal candidates but we are also part of the so-called politics of change where one should look at what is good for the majority of the people,201d Sapar added.

Gabriela Women2019s Party is an alliance of women2019s organizations in the country that promotes 201cthe rights and welfare of marginalized and under-represented Filipino women through participation in the country2019s electoral system and organs of governance,201d according to their website.
 
Sun.Star Davao asked some people whether they put gender as one of the criteria in choosing their candidates.
Jimmy, 45, a trisikad driver and a resident of Barangay 34 in Davao City, strongly believes that gender plays an important role in governance.
But he believes the males are better.
He said gender is a basis for his decision and that he prefers males to get the higher positions in the country.

201cAng mayor nga posisyon...
pero sa dako-dako nga posisyon sama sa president, dapat gyud kay lalaki ,201d he said.

When asked why he thinks this way, Jimmy said that women are not firm with their principles or stand.

Ateneo De Davao University architecture student Pinky Qui\xf1ones, 20, and University of Mindanao architecture student Ken Alorro, 20, disagree with Jimmy.
They both expressed that gender must not be the basis in choosing the candidates.
Gender is not even a basis for their choices, both said.
That the masses still regard men as the superior gender is but an offshoot of being a patriarchal society, Sapar said.
201cWhy not give women a chance to show their capabilities in leading the country?201d Sapar asked in the vernacular, implying that one of the hindrances faced by women is that the society tends to tie them to responsibilities at home where they are left to take care of the household chores and also tagging them as incapable of leading the country.
Still the nagging question remains: when can one say that women are well-represented in elections?
The heat is on  , The heat is on  Christine Joice C.
Cudis,  THE campaign season may not have officially started, but we all know it is now being waged.
Each candidate, especially those seeking a national post, would want their names among the most remembers among the millions of voters.
It2019s a race to the top.
 
According to a political strategist and analyst, Perry Callanta, once a candidate reaches the top 5 of the surveys of SWS and Pulse Asia, they can already say that they won.
 
"Wala pang nasali sa survey na hindi na-elect.
Ang ibig sabihin lang, ang Filipino ayaw bumoto sa walang pag-asang manalo," Callanta added.
 
To understand the political mindset of a Filipino voter, reading on the Political Mindscape 2, a national psychographics survey done by the only registered lobbying and political management firm in the country, Publicus Asia will help.
 
Among the points discussed in the presentations of Dr.
Clarissa David of UP College of Mass Communication, and Ma.
Lourdes Tiquia, founder of Publicuswere the following:  
The Filipino voters can be categorized into five segments.
 
The Sparks, which makes 16 percent of the Filipino voters are found in the urban areas with higher representations of the non-working groups.
They are interested to be updated with political issues in the local government and believe voting is an expression of citizenship and politics.
 
The Detached Conservatives who are 12 percent of the total are those in the rural areas, with higher participation of the Muslims.
Most likely, they are the ones who will opt not to vote either because they consider the election system in their area as too complicated ot they are affected by personal commitments.
 
The Ambivalents who are about 26 percent of the voters are mostly Visayan-speaking residents with the lowest incidence of internet accessibility.
They see politics as irrelevant to society's progress.
  
The In-control people who are 23 percent of the voters are mostly Ilonggo speaking residents.
Voting matters to them, and they believe it is essential in improving teh society.
  
The Catalysts, 23 percent are mostly from the rural areas as well but they are those who are politically engaged and make efforts to know more about politics adn elections.
They perceive voting positively.
 
In the same survey, young voters were perceived as those who prefer character above experience, positions, and education when considering their votes for president and senator.
 
The adults, on the other hand, expects and prefers a compassionate presidential candidate to prioritize his countrymen's welfare by providing livelihood, medical care, assistance during calamities, scholarships, and housing projects.
 
During the registration of the voters in the city, Sun.Star Davao asked them on how they evaluate the candidates.
 
Esier Generale, 39, said that he went early in the satellite registration site so he can vote his President.
"I listen to the news, but if I cannot choose who to vote, I will resort to the choice of our Barangay leader because I believe that he knows who the best is."  
Loren, 24, said that he has not slept yet since the last 12 hours as he is working as a call center agent but he forced himself to file for biometrics to catch the registration before the deadline.
"I often browse into the candidates' Facebook pages so I will get to know them better."  
A 69-year-old voter who refused to be named said that she conducts thorough research before deciding who to vote for.
"I read a lot from the newspaper to discern who is worthy of my vote.
As of now, I can only see one person who deserves it, others are running for self-interest."  
Ideally, a candidate's previous political experience plays an important role in the voter's consideration.
 
There is a difference between a voter who thinks and a voter who relies on another's thinking.
  
We should stop treating the advertisements of the candidates as our only basis of who is worthy of our votes as they are only projecting one side of them; hence, we should start involving ourselves deeper in this cause.
  
At the end of this, we can say that Mahatma Ghandi was telling the truth when he said that if a person wants to see a change in the world, he shall start within himself.
 
Thus, if Filipinos are sincere in their aspiration to see and live in a better Philippines, then they should not only vote but vote responsibly.
Decorate your home for Christmas, Decorate your home for ChristmasKarina V.
Canedo, Christmas won2019t be complete without decors that remind us of the important season of giving,love and warmth.
In different stores here in the city you can find amazing decors that will not just brighten your homes but will bring the very soul of Christmas to your homes.
Christmas trees - available in Gaisano Mall , DCLA, Victoria Plaza Mall.price ranges from P200- P20,000.
Colored Christmas Tress are available in Gmall with various shapes and sizes, there's even a glowing sakura tree in different colors.
These trees are also available in Victoria plaza which can reach as high as 12 feet.
DCLA Plaza also has Christmas trees which no longer need Christmas lights.
Christmas lights - In this three stores you can also buy Christmas lights for as low as P48.00-P1200.
Waterproof lights are also available in Gmall and DCLA.

Christmas balls - you can find a large collection of them at GMall with different designs and colors for as low as 55 pesos.
Some unique designs of Christmas balls can also be found in Victoria Plaza.
Christmas Village - As for those who want to build their village this year, you can find different sizes of Santa Claus at Victoria Plaza, price ranges from P599 to P1493.
For other decorations such as glittery poinsettia plants, and other glitter laden ferns, you can find one in every store for P6 to P249 per piece.
Other than what was mentioned, decors such as Belen, Christmas wreaths,   Santa Claus figures, figurines, Santa Claus mugs, can be found in Gmall, but some unique Christmas candle with flower arrangements can also be found in Victoria Plaza.
Free your creative minds as you decide for your different designs and style for this Christmas and let the Christmas decors make your Christmas more exciting.
Holiday Outfit Ideas , Holiday Outfit Ideas Kriztja Marae G.
Labrador, DECEMBER is fast approaching, the month of Christmas parties here and there and what better way to welcome this merry month by planning and preparing your outfits ahead?
We2019ve got you covered by coming up with these three outfit ideas for the left and right parties coming ahead.
Corporate wine night
An outfit idea perfect for that elegant corporate party you have in a fancy hotel.
The secret to achieving this look is in choosing a dress that really complements your figure and stands out even without too much accessories, stunning details like the one in the back here is really a perfect addition for that posh look.
Go with dark colors and accessorize them with gold and voila! You are off to a night of perfection.
Meeting the clan
Whether it2019s your significant other2019s clan or your own clan, this outfit which has the shabby chic vibe is a sure stunner.
From meeting his parents or greeting your grandparents, this simple dress will surely be comfortable enough for an afternoon or a night of 201cchikkahan201d .
Last minute Kris Kringle
Even though how much you try to arrange parties with your friends for the holidays it mostly always end up to happen on the last minute.
This outfit idea is great for a spontaneous night out with friends and catching up.
The Yuletide season is a time to have fun and enjoy the company of the people around you, do not let last minute fashion planning for your parties or gatherings get in the way of your holiday adventure!
All outfits and accessories featured can be found at Chimes Boutique located at FelcrisCentrale in Quimpo Boulevard, Davao City.

Special thanks to Chimes Botique Felcris Centrale store manager Ms.
Jazy Mendiola and her friendly staff for accommodating us and to our lovely model Ms.
Dane Rhea Sillo.
A gift of quality living at Matina Enclaves, A gift of quality living at Matina EnclavesKriztja Marae G.
Labrador, MAKE this coming holiday season special with the gift of quality home living in the metro only from Matina Enclaves.
A residential development by homegrown real estate developer Escandor Development Corporation , Matina Enclaves is a 5.3-hectare development situated along Quimpo Boulevard in Matina, just across Matina Golf Club a residential community offering a sanctuary from the metro2019s hustle and bustle.
It offers three residential options to choose from: The Plains which is an open lot development; The Courtyard composed of house and lot units; and The Enclaves Residences their medium rise condominium composed of six building.

Recently launching their third building, Esdevco has expanded their market for their 2 bedroom buyers by introducing new and affordable 45 square meter units without compromising the quality of their units, now that is one good investment!
Other than its living spaces, Matina Enclaves is also a great community that is packed with amenities that future residents will surely love: a two-storey clubhouse called CAME  that features a gym, kids' playroom, function/ meeting room and function hall that can accommodate up to 150 persons.
The first Enclaves Residence building is scheduled for top-off on early months of 2016 and its projected turnover on the fourth quarter of 2017; the second building is scheduled for piling by end of 2015 and projected turnover on third quarter of 2017; for the third building, piling will begin by mid-2016 and projected turnover on mid 2018.
A gift for your family, future family, or even yourself this Christmas, investing in a premium living space to call home at Matina Enclaves is worth it.
Shopping tips to avoid the holiday blues!, Shopping tips to avoid the holiday blues!Jenny Molbog-Mendoza, As the holiday season draws nearer , shopping seems to be one of the most exciting things to do.
Well, who doesn't want to shop?
While buying the things which we have been looking forward to own before the year ends makes us giddy, we can never deny the fact that picking the right gifts for our special someone or those we love is actually more fun and exciting, right?
But wait! Do not rush to your favorite stores yet.
We have gathered some tips for you to consider before you fill your shopping cart  with numerous holiday giveaways.
1.
Keep your shopping list handy.
By having a list of what to buy , you will save on time and money.
The logic here is simple: when you are already sure of what items to pick, you can just go directly to the nook where those products are displayed once you are inside the store.
2.
Know your budget.
By knowing how much you can allocate for buying gifts, you will not end up broke, or resort to swiping your credit card once you run out of cash.
3.
Shop as early as you can.
If you think that you can already start shopping now, do it, and never wait for December before you hit the stores.
4.
Categorize the gifts that you have identified.
Prior to visiting your favorite shop, make sure to categorize your identified gifts according to which particular place you are going to get all of those.
5.
Schedule your trip.
Make a timeline of your trips to the mall for you to enjoy a smoother shopping experience.
6.
Keep your bag light.
Remember that you are bringing a number of shopping bags once you get out of the mall.
Therefore, reserve your energy for such task.
After all, you don't need to bring your entire "kikay" kit just to have all your fave lipstick shades inside your bag.
7.
Be comfy.
Apart from your budget, you also need to consider your outfit.
You need to wear your most comfortable clothes when you go shopping so that you can move easier when digging for the greatest finds.
8.
Go to the mall when everyone is somewhere else.
Don't go with the crowd.
Visit the mall when it is off-peak.
Enjoy shopping!
I wish...
, I wish...
Christine Joice C.
Cudis, The season of giving and sharing is already in midair but before we think of buying gifts for our loved ones, let's discern first on what they really want for Christmas.
We have collected few of the wishes of our readers for this season to let us know what other people hope for the most.
Janine Abejay, Photographer
I wish for the good health of my family all through the years.
Also for my career to flourish.
Dexter Mancao, Accountancy Graduate
I pray that I and my friends will become Certified Public Accountants in the future.
Kristine Elemino, Financial Adviser
I wish to attend more reach out programs and organize financial literacy seminars for the people.
Since I already feel blessed, I would love to share what I have to others so I could put a smile on their faces.
Ogs Ablazo, Computer Studies Professor
Makapasa sa thesis.
mahuman ug masters.
dagdag sahod.
Third Jabilles, Photographer
Sana lahat ng nagsasabing "Okay lang ako" ay maging okay na talaga sila.
Para okay ang lahat.
Okay? Okay.
Weigibbor G.
Labos, Artist
I wish for everyone's happiness and as for my family, I pray that although we are away from each other, we will still continue to be receive the love of each other.
I wish to be in Davao this December to celebrate the Christmas with you.
Bernard Al-ag, Davao City Councilor
My personal Christmas wish is for my wife, Cherry to have a safe pregnancy and delivery of our third child.

For the Dabawenyos, I hope that we will continue to experience abundance here.
Ruben Gonzaga, TV host/Actor
I wish for everyone to be genuinely happy and to celebrate love for each other.
Good health!
Marissa P.
Abella, Davao City Councilor
I wish the lumads ont have to come down from the mountains to ask for food to eat and that they will have more livelihood programs to sustain their needs.
Shopping homes this Christmas , Shopping homes this Christmas Ace June Rell S.
Perez, IMAGINE if Davao was a mall and the real-estate properties were the stores inside it, where would you choose to shop?  
Vivalde Residences
The highest condominium to rise in Mindanao made possible by the Euro Towers International, Inc.
is eyed to be completed by 2018.
Rising along C.M.
Recto Street and R.
Magsaysay Ave., the emerald-colored 37-storey property has a distinctive European architecture.
To celebrate Holidays even better, Vivalde Residences Davao lures potential buyers to venture in the most opportune time with its gift-giving ways of the 201c5 % To Move-In Plan.201d
Interested buyers are encouraged to drop by in the showroom office of property along C.M.
Recto Street and R.
Magsaysay Ave.,.
Matina Enclaves
Escandor Development Corporation's  Matina Enclaves, a 5.3-hectare development considered to be one of the best situated residential developments in Davao City along Quimpo Boulevard in Matina, adjacent to Davao 2013 Matina Golf Course offers three residential options.

These are the Plains which are an open lot development; the Courtyard for house and lot units; and the six-building Enclaves Residences, a medium rise condominium.
For the Christmas season, Esdevco2019s third building introduced an affordable 45 square meter units.
Ciudades
Ciudades2019 of the Torre Lorenzo Development Corp.
 is bent on transforming Davao City as the next world-class travel destination as it gears up in developing  first large-scale integrated mixed-use master planned township development in the city.
Rising on a 250-hectare property in Mandug, Davao City, and the property will be composed of five subdivisions, two schools, commercial areas, and an industrial park.

Ciudades is offering its lot prices at 6200 square meters for the First Mindanao Business Park  is at pre-selling rate until December 31, 2015.
Both buyers and sellers for lots sold within the period will be enjoying incentives from the property developer.
VerdonParc
VerdonParc, a three-hectare condominium development composed of four buildings of the DMC Urban Property Developers Inc.
 located atEcoland Drive in Davao City offers a vibrant mini-metro vibe whose progressive yet peaceful character is expected to naturally make it the next destination of choice for real estate ventures.

As part of their early Christmas promos, which runs from November 1 to December 31, they offer buyers of VerdonParc, Magallanes Residences, Palmetto Place and Hacienda to choose a Home Appliance Showcase which include a microwave oven, refrigerator and more, for every purchase within the promo period.

Inspiria
Inspiria, a 21-storey mixed-used condominium, which will be located at JP Laurel Avenue, Bajada, beside Abreeza Ayala Mall will be the first high-rise project of Gardenstate Enterprises, a Davao-based developer will be  condominium.
Rising above with an eccentric architectural design inspired by Durian fruit, the condominium, once erected, is seen to be one of the tourist attractions and landmarks in the city.
For its Holiday offering, Inspiria offers unit's reservation for as slow as P20,000 to P30,000 only.
Construction of the property will commence before the year ends or early of next year.

Aeon Towers
FTC Group of Companies' 33-storey Aeon Towers' iconic, world class condominium in Davao City with Smart Home Technology Ready also set to bring Davao's image in real-estate industry to another level at it features quality and unique architectural design and outstanding amenities.
The units of the high-rise project offers a very reasonable and Dabawenyo friendly price.
Sun.Star to hold first VisMin inter-school cheerdance competition, Sun.Star to hold first VisMin inter-school cheerdance competition
Sun.Star to hold first VisMin inter-school cheerdance competition 
SUN.STAR Publishing Inc.
will hold the very first Sun.Star Visayas-Mindanao inter-school cheerdance competition on December 12, 2015 at the New Cebu Coliseum, Cebu City.
Inspired by University Athletic Association of the Philippines  cheerdance competition in Manila, Sun.Star decided to create the event.
In a press conference on Thursday, Sun.Star Management President Gina Garcia-Atienza said that the competition is open to college level participants from schools in Visayas and Mindanao.
Garcia-Atienza added that cheerdance in Cebu was just for performance before, so now, they wanted it to become bigger and more interesting.
"We have four judges from Manila, who are judges from UAAP, and we have two people from Cebu," said Garcia-Atienza.
She said that Sun.Star is willing to work with Cebu Schools Athletic Foundation Inc.
 to organize future cheerdance competitions in Cebu.
"We are very willing to work with Cesafi.
In fact, if we are able to talk with Cesafi members, by next year, we can do it together.
I am sure the schools are looking forward to it," said Garcia-Atienza.
Juver Pataytay, chief consultant of the Sun.Star Cheerdance 2015, said this is the first time that all the technical requirements will be identified.

Anthony Ornejas, part of the cheerdance committee, said the registration fee is at P3,500 but with two receipts of one-year subscription of Sun.Star's e-paper, the registration fee will be lowered to P1,000.
Pataytay said the deadline of registration was supposedly on September 30, but was extended to give more time for the participants from out of town to process the requirements.
The committee is yet to set the final date for the registration.
Those interested can still sign up at specials.sunstar.com.ph/cheerdance.
The top three placers will receive a trophy, medals, and the following cash prizes: P50,000 for first place, P30,000 for second place, and P20,000 for third place.

Making Apec mobile, Making Apec mobile"BRINGING experiences to the next level."
This is a mantra that is often heard within the four walls of TeamAsia's office in Alabang and has been consistently translated to many things that the integrated marketing communications agency has been involved with in the past 23 years.
When the Department of Trade and Industry tapped them to stage some events that were connected with the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation , TeamAsia studied all their options and decided to change the game by bringing the important conversations of the summit to the mobile realm.
"We believe that through the innovative use of mobile application, we were able to really bring the discussion to the audience.
The discussion is no longer limited to the panelists or whoever is speaking at the podium because now, through technology, we have brought the conversation to the delegates' palm," TeamAsia Managing Director Bea Lim said.
The idea for a mobile application for the local Apec events started when TeamAsia President and Founder Monette Hamlin attended the Apec Women and the Economy Fora in Bali in 2013 and in Beijing last year, together with other representatives from the Women's Business Council.
Noting that there was hardly any opportunity for private sector delegates to be engaged in the discussions, she recommended that a mobile app be introduced at the Apec Women and the Economy Fora that was to be hosted by the Philippines in September 2015.
 This would allow the audience to voice out their opinions as well as join the conversation during the summit.

The mobile app designed by TeamAsia had within it an audience response system  that allowed the delegates to weigh in on the topics presented and even answer questions posited by the panel and speakers.
It was also used to gauge the opinion of the delegates about certain topics.
TeamAsia's mobile app was used in four Apec-related events hosted by the Department of Trade and Industry, namely: Public Private Dialogue on Women and the Economy ; the Women's Business and Smart Technology Seminar; the Seminar of Empowering Women through ICT for Inclusive Growth held last September; and more recently the Apec High-Level Dialogue on Inclusive Business.
The ARS system embedded in the mobile app was first used during PPDWE, the first time such technology was used for an Apec event.
TeamAsia also did the web and content design for both the Apec Women and the Economy Fora and the High-Level Dialogue on Inclusive Business.
"Apec is undoubtedly the most important event this year, and we are proud to be part of such a historic event," Lim said.
"But aside from this, we are really happy that we enabled a more interactive discussion and that our delegates were able to communicate with each other better."
TeamAsia is proud of helping Apec achieve its goals of building a better world through inclusiveness.

"We, in TeamAsia, believe in the importance of building inclusive economies, as we see this as the most viable way to really uplift the lives of not only our countrymen but also millions of people around the world," Lim said.

Social media and elections     , Social media and elections     Karlo Paolo R.
Pates, THE 2016 elections is regarded as the most challenging elections to date in the country as the Internet, specifically the social media, now plays a pivotal role as the platform for advancement of communication among Filipinos which in turn could affect to the would be results of the polls.

Social media has become an influential platform of communication in the Philippines as a driving force which encompasses all generations to be aware of the existing issues in our society nowadays.
 
As the 2015 State of the Mobile Web Report shows that the Philippines topped the survey as the "Most Social Nation" in the world.
Aside from that the Philippines was also named as the social media capital in the world by the 2014 Wave 7 Social Study after study shows that most Filipinos have logged a total number of 53 hours per week online.

With the advent of the arising trend in the Internet, Filipino candidates can now utilize digital campaign to promote their respective campaign platforms and advocacies even before the regular campaign period officially starts on February 9, 2016 to May 7, 2016 for President, Vice President, Senator, and party-list groups, ON paper, the campaign period for local candidates should start on March 25, 2016 until May 7, 2016, but campaigning is banned on March 25, the scheduled first day of local bets' campaign period, due to the observance of Good Friday.
 
But some election experts also say that as much as the candidates can really enjoy and use the wide scope of influence brought by the internet, it's also in the same platform where the fate of their candidacies are at high stake thru the demolition of one's reputation.

Lawyer Danilo Cullo, election officer of District 2 of the Commission on Election , admitted that the presence of the social media and internet could make a difference and a huge impact to the result of the May 2016 Elections for both national and local posts.
Although the Internet has already emerged during the 2010 and 2013 elections, Cullo, however, said that the aspiring candidates for both national and local positions could fully utilize the power of the internet for their gains in the upcoming 2016 elections.

Compared to the previous two elections, Cullo said that indeed the power of the social media and internet will be tested for this elections.

"In my own opinion, dako ang factor ang social media as to the would be results of the election.
Makita man gud nato na halos tanan nagagamit sa internet even kadtong dili pa voting age ," Cullo told Sun.Star Davao in an interview recently at the Comelec-Davao office.

While the Comelec is gearing up for the releasing of the final list of the candidates on December 10, they are now trying to come up with a set of rules to regulate election campaigning thru the internet.
The passage of the Republic Act  9006, an act otherwise known as the Fair Elections Act, supervises or regulates the enjoyment and utilization of all franchises or operation of media communication to guarantee or ensure equal opportunity for public service including access to media time and space.

While the passage of the "Fair Elections Act" in 2001 was to ensure free, orderly, and credible elections, the Comelec is now facing another dilemma now brought by the rise of digital age.
How the Comelec monitors and at the same time limit the use of the aspiring public servants the resources available on social media for their campaign.

In an article published on August 12, the CNN Philippines website stated that the Comelec is set to impose rules on campaign aired or published on video sharing sites, blogs, and other social media platforms like Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram.

Comelec spokesperson James Jimenez said that the social media is sent to play a significant role in elections next year.
But Jimenez said that they need to be careful in regulating the platform of social media that it's not violating the public's freedom of expression.

The Comelec said their focus would be on how much the candidates spend on producing what would be aired on the social media and published on blogs.
As the general for the Comelec says that everything that is paid should be regulated.

Jimenez, however, admitted that regulation of the digital platform has its limits.
Cullo, for his part, said that no resolution on the regulation on the social media has yet to be issued to them from the main office.

"As far as I'm concerned yung mga ating mga nire-regulate pa lang naman ay yung advertisement time sa mga television networks, radios, and newspapers.
Patiyung mga size ng mga posters, leaflets nila at kung saan lang nila pwede ilagay ang mga campaign materials nila.
Pero on social media wala pa namang ganun," Cullo stressed.

But Cullo said that he is expecting that all candidates will utilize the presence of social media for their campaign but it would still be up to the voters to discern what to take as legitimate information.

"But I think the social media is the platform that could really make a huge difference in next year's election.
That's why the candidates will be exploring and utilize its power," he added in the vernacular.

Davao City Councilor Bernard Al-ag also believes that the rise of the social media could really play a big impact to the 2016 elections.

"It is now the primary source of information among the middle and upper class of our society.
It is an effective medium for political in the urban area," Al-ag said in a separate statement.

But Al-ag reiterated that the traditional form of campaign will remain as an effective move in the rural barangays.

Living the sweet life, Living the sweet lifeDeneb R.
Batucan, Isan de Jesus finds happiness in honey
, ISAN de Jesus is one of the few people privileged to live the sweet life.
After all, living in a beekeeping farm has the sweetest perks of all 2013 honey.
And in Isan2019s backyard, honey is in constant production.
Growing up, Isan2019s life was filled with adventure.
Swimming and traveling was her family2019s own version of normal.
She grew up frolicking in her mom2019s garden with her two sisters.
Her parents have always had the green thumb, buy it was only in the late 2000s that they decided to up the ante and delve into beekeeping.
That2019s when Dad2019s Organic Farm was born.
More about Isan's story in Sun.Star Weekend's November 15, 2015 issue.
Click here to read more.

INFOGRAPHIC: Fare rates for MyBus, INFOGRAPHIC: Fare rates for MyBusDaryl D.
Anunciado, THE Land Transportation Franchising and Regulatory Board  recently approved the P25 to P75 fare rates of MyBus, which will serve four routes through from the cities of Talisay, Cebu, Mandaue and Lapu-Lapu.
The bus route will operate once a franchise is issued by the LTFRB.
MyBus fleet has 77 units that will operate in Metro Cebu.
These European-built, 60-foot buses are air-conditioned, have free WiFi, and equipped with security cameras on board.
 
Here is an infographic of the fare rates approved for Metro Cebu: 


Facebook tries to ease heartache of breakups with new tool, Facebook tries to ease heartache of breakups with new tool
This July 16, 2013 file photo shows a sign at Facebook headquarters in Menlo Park, Calif.
The heartache of a broken relationship may soon become less painful on Facebook.

SAN FRANCISCO -- Facebook is trying to ease the heartache of breaking up.
A feature announced Thursday will allow people who have split up with a spouse or partner to turn on an option that spares them the emotional pain of constantly seeing their ex-lover's posts and pictures in their news feed on the world's largest social network.
Facebook will begin testing the breakup protection on mobile devices in the US before deciding whether to offer it to all of its 1.5 billion accountholders worldwide.
The option is designed for people who don't want to risk offending a former husband, wife, girlfriend or boyfriend by taking the more extreme step of ejecting or blocking them from their Facebook network.
After changing their relationship status on Facebook, people will also be allowed to remove their names from past posts linking them to a former partner.
"This work is part of our ongoing effort to develop resources for people who may be going through difficult moments in their lives," Facebook product manager Kelly Winters wrote in a blog post.
The breakup protection serves as another reminder of how deeply ingrained Facebook has become in society.
More than one billion people now hang out on Facebook at least once a day and those who have the network's addictive mobile application installed on their smartphones tend to visit even more frequently.
The Menlo Park, California, company has incentive to try to keep its users as happy as possible.
People who become upset with what appears in their Facebook feeds are more likely to avoid coming to the network, depriving the company of the opportunity to collect more information about their preferences and show them ads aimed at those interests.
The formula has turned Facebook into a huge success story since Mark Zuckerberg founded the service in a Harvard University dorm room more than a decade ago.
Facebook's market value now stands at $300 billion.

LOOK: What's inside the IEC Pavilion, LOOK: What's inside the IEC Pavilion
IEC Pavilion 
Laureen R.
Mondo\xf1edo, THE International Eucharistic Congress  Pavilion, built and financed by property developer Duros Development Corporation, is a 26,000-square-meter facility that will accommodate thousands of people attending the international gathering of Catholic leaders in January 2016 in Cebu City.
The facility, worth P500 million, was designed with a seating capacity of 15,000.
It now stands at the San Carlos Seminary in Mabolo, Cebu City, and will be under the name of the Archdiocese of Cebu once turned over by Duros on November 21.
It is where most of the IEC activities will be held.
Below are photos showing what's inside the IEC Pavilion.
Plenary
The plenary is where most of the local and international delegates to the IEC will be seated.
This area can accommodate around 7,000 to 9,000 people, said Architect Carlos Pio Zafra.

Gallery
This area can accommodate around 3,000 to 5,000 people.

Adoration chapel
The IEC Pavilion's adoration chapel was originally designed by Sister Celeste.
Glass walls will be installed here, said construction manager Rizal Camangyan Jr.
The chapel is still under construction, as the ceiling was changed.


Media center
The Church has allocated a space for local and international media personnel who will cover the IEC in January 2016.
This area can accommodate around 400 people.

Media personnel holding area
About seven rooms at the IEC Pavilion are designated for media personnel who will cover the international gathering of Catholic leaders in January 2016.
These holding areas will be converted into rooms for minor seminarians or those who are at the elementary level.


Sacristy
The IEC Pavilion has nine rooms for the bishops and priests who are attending the IEC.
These rooms are where the bishops and priests prepare for a service.
 These rooms will also house minor seminarians after the IEC.

PWDs ramp
The IEC Pavilion is accessible both to young and old, even to those with disabilities.
It has a ramp at the back portion of the building that persons with disabilities can use to access the second and third floors.
 This ramp leads to the media center at the third floor, which is overlooking the plenary.


IEC Secretariat office
This room will accommodate personnel from the office of the IEC Secretariat, which is handling the preparations for the international gathering.


Dining area
There's also a space at the IEC Pavilion where the priest and bishops can dine.
This will also be converted into a dining and kitchen area for the minor seminarians who will be housed at the building after the IEC.

Posts, columns and bars
The IEC Pavilion was designed and constructed to withstand a strong earthquake, considering that the Church plans to use it as an evacuation center in times of disaster.

Entrance and exit doors
Several doors can be found at the IEC Pavilion, making it highly accessible to IEC delegates.
The main entrance is located at the side of the building, just meters away from Pope John Paul II Avenue in Mabolo, Cebu City.


Aside from these features, the IEC Pavilion also has a parking area at the basement that can accommodate around 200 vehicles.
The facility will also be equipped with 27 closed circuit television cameras, 1,000 sprinkler heads, and more than 1,700 lighting fixtures.
The three-level facility, which is 97 percent complete as of November 19, will be used as a pastoral center, multipurpose hall and will also be leased for events, conventions and exhibits.
It will be operated as a regular facility by Duros Development Corporation, under the name of the Archdiocese of Cebu, after the IEC.

Masbad: In-phone photo editing, Masbad: In-phone photo editingRoark L.
Masbad, Wacky Tech, MOBILE photography is ubiquitous these days.
The majority of us will rely on our mobile devices for those quick snaps to capture a moment.
I'm seeing a steady pace towards not using a camera anymore to take photos.
And with the rising megapixel count on today's smartphones, it's not much of a surprise that this is one feature we first look at when shopping for smartphones or devices.

The higher megapixel count attracts faster but that high megapixel count won't necessarily be the only factor to look at.
But that's for another time to discuss.
Anyway, like I said, smartphones and mobile devices are our go-to devices now when snapping up moments.
It doesn't matter where and when these moments happen -- in a party, during a road trip, in a family vacation.
When it does, we pull out our devices to take a photo.

And when we have these saved, the next question is where to edit them.
Should it be transferred to your laptop or desktop computer to be edited before posting it? Or just do it in-phone.

Let me share with you my top two app choices to edit photos in-phone.
Snapseed
In most cases, well, 98 percent of the time for me, I edit in-phone.
And in a lot of those times, my go-to app is Snapseed.

It's a free app.
It's made and supported by Google.
And it's got plenty of controls to make any user happy.
Results are pretty awesome.
I get a lot of granular controls to use to come up with a better photo.
Here's a photo I took of a sunset over Talikud Island here in Davao.


Pretty, right? And that's just me using the basic tools in Snapseed.
There's a lot more to do while inside the app.

PicTapGo
I discovered this app while crawling the net for interesting images taken with mobile devices.

It's a fun app.
Lots of ready filters that you can slap on top of your photo.
Oh, and you can actually put one filter on top of the other and even set  how much a filter will affect your photo.

It's a quick fix to get a different feel out of a photo.
And you get a wide array of choices of filters too.
So much more than the regular choices in Instagram.

By the way, you can save your own "presets" or "combos" of filters so you won't have to remember everything yourself.

Here's one I did with PicTapGo.

So there.
If you still don't have these two apps, go check them out.
If you're into mobile photography, these two will surely become indispensable for you as it is for me.

Finally, don't fret too much about the editing part.
Keep it fun.
Because that's what it is all about in the first place.

Happy shooting!
PS.
I wrote this piece on Evernote on my iPhone 6.
Handy app!
Seeing with the heart   , Seeing with the heart   Ace June Rell S.
Perez, YOU not only see with the eyes, seeing with the heart touches more lives.

Living in today2019s digital era characterized with technology that increases the speed and breadth of knowledge turnover within the economy and society, one requires complete senses to feel in and cope with the fast-changing world but not for a 29-year old Information and Communication Technology  expert and a proud visually impaired Ebenchito M.
Pabia.

Born with Congenital Glaucoma, a rare condition caused by incorrect development of the eye's drainage system before birth, Pabia admitted that life as a visually-challenged man is no easy.

201cYes, it is not easy but it also is not that hard, I didn2019t allow blindness to box me into someone I am not bound to be, our condition, whatever that is should not kill our dreams,201d he shared.

A graduate of Associate in Computer Technology in Asia Pacific College, now an instructor of the 201cComputer Eyes201d program of the IBM Philippines where he is a scholar, Pabia brightens and touches the life visions of his students who are also sharing the same situation with him.

201cI told my students that these digital and technology-driven days, it is already a need for them to master how to take advantage from these things, we need to equipped ourselves with the necessary skills, so as not to be left behind,201d he said.

He told his students that they are normal guys with extraordinary challenges which they all should be grateful for since God trusted them to face it.

201cI always make it to a point to instill with my students that they can do whatever normal students can, even outstand them, na like other people with no visual challenges that are performing in the It related activities even programming they can do it as long as they will help themselves achieve it,201d he added.

He insists that a lot also rests on those with disability to help them and make headway in life.
 
Pabia also recalled that his experience when he was still back in his elementary and secondary days, he enrolled in a regular public school not with a special education system .

201cMy family did not know that there is a Sped for someone like me but I saw it as a blessing in disguise, if not because of it I cannot experience what I should be experiencing.
It was really a struggle for me because all of my classmates are physically in condition not compared to my situation,201d Pabia shared.

He pointed out that what made it more challenging is apart from the teasing he got from his classmates and schoolmates, his teachers before also discriminated his ability.

201cMy teachers would even say that why I did enrolled in the regular school considering my situation emphasizing that I2019m too slow for learning, reading and writing,201d he said.

But Pabia did not allow anyone or anything to hinder his ultimate goal which is to learn and live like normal people do.
 
201cAko naman na eager na matuto, deadma, sulat lang, exam lang, sa kabutihang palad nakaraos naman ako, so in the end I made them proud of me,201d Pabia added.

After school, Pabia got in a number of jobs including as sales and marketing representative in a school for a blind in his hometown in Pasig, Manila and a businessmen venturing in computer related stuffs.
IBM Philippines regularly invites him as a computer instructor for its Computer Eyes program and other IT-related endeavor.

Pabia recently visited Davao City for a week rendering his knowledge in advance computer skills to visually-impaired students from Visayas and Mindanao.

201cThis is my happiness, enabling other visually-impaired youths to see beyond what I eyes can see,201d Pabia said.

Pabia, a true epitome of character for all the visually-challenged individuals has proven that we need not only our mere eyes to see the true wonders of the world, that there is more to what our naked eyes can see.

Balay Paglaum: An edifice of hope for IPs in Panabo City  , Balay Paglaum: An edifice of hope for IPs in Panabo City  

Lorenzo E.
Mendoza, THERE2019S now a place to enable young tribal youths to seek formal education without having to suffer the rigors and travel expenses of a daily travel from their hinterland villages in Panabo City.

The Department of Education, Panabo City Division under Schools Division Superintendent Dr.
Maria Ines C.
Asuncion, CESO VI accepted a Three-Room Building composed of two dormitory rooms and a mess hall/study room named Balay Paglaum from the Panabo City Local Government Unit led by Mayor James G.
Gamao on November 6, 2015 at barangay Lower Panaga, Panabo City.

Balay Paglaum is a shelter intended for the IP learners who are and who will be enrolled at Roxas Elementary School and Sindaton National High School Annex.
The structure aims to lower and eventually eradicate the dropout rate among IP learners, a vehicle to improve IP learners2019 academic performance and to help augment expenses of the IP families who are living 15-20 kilometers away from the said schools.
 
PROJECT CONCEPTUALIZATION 
The project is an offshoot of a research entitled 201cThe Unspoken Learning Landscape of an IP Student: A Process Documentation and Analysis.201d A series of consultations and dialogues were conducted to make the project relevant to the actual needs of the beneficiaries and the kinds of support systems to be established to sustain the project and maximize its benefits.

Balay Paglaum is a triangulated project of the Division of Panabo City supported by the Local Government Unit which was originally initiated by the late City Mayor Hon.
Jose L.
Silvosa Sr.
and now fully supported by the administration of Mayor Gamao with the full backing of the Tribal Leaders spearheaded by Datu Generoso Bonguyan, Datu Isagani Concian, and Datu Joel Manlangan and the Department of Education headed by SDS Asuncion.
 
THE BLESSING AND TURNOVER 
The turnover and the blessing of the shelter were attended by the LGU officials- Hon.
Mayor Gamao, Hon.
Emmanuel Pamisaran, Hon.
Wahid Ranain.
Hon.
Rodrigo Ambasan, City IPMR, 2nd District Congressional Key Staff Edwin Pardillo, BFP Fire Marshal Vilner Avillon, PNP of Panabo City, the six Tribal Leaders, DepEd Officials- Education Program Supervisors, Chiefs, School Heads and Principals.
 
The activity was timed with the 2nd Division Panaghiusa Festival attended by the IP learners, teachers and IP parents.
 
The two school heads - Dr.
Jonalyn Badua of Roxas ES and concurrent Division IPED Focal Person and Mr.
Glenn Patriarca of Sindaton NHS Annex together with Lower Panaga village chief Letecia Cabactolan received all the visitors.

Balay Paglaum will open its doors to these learners by the first week of January 2016 as a Memorandum of Agreement is still being drafted and details about its operations and maintenance are still ongoing.
Individuals, companies, NGOs and other stakeholders are invited to support the program.
 
PROJECT DETAILS 
Balay Paglaum emerged from the partnership of DepEd Panabo City Division in collaboration with the City Government of Panabo to strengthen Indigenous Peoples Education  by improving culture-based education and culture-responsive school management in Roxas Elementary School, Lower Panaga, Panabo City  One of the realizations from the consultations held was the sheer distance of mainstream education to these underprivileged children and youths, which discourage them to continue with their studies.
 
The City Government provided P2,000.000 as financial assistance in the project, which bridges DepEd curriculum competencies with Indigenous Knowledge Systems and Practices , indigenous learning systems, and community history, among others.

As the community2019s counterpart, the elders of the tribes assured Deped and the LGU that they will ensure the security of the dormitory.
The day after the turnover was highlighted with different tribal games and activities such as Piglet Catching, Tribal Food Cooking, Tribal Beadwork Making, Tribal House Visit and Display, Medical/Dental Check Up, Libre Gupit, Manicure and Pedicure and a Boodle Fight that symbolizes the unity and cooperation among the tri-people of Panabo City.
  
STATEMENTS OF COMMITMENT AND SUPPORT 
SDS Asuncion emphasized that the partnership will ensure that no child shall be left behind.
 
201cIn partnership with Indigenous Peoples' communities and with the support of other stakeholders especially the Local Government Unit, we will continue to address education concerns of indigenous learners by boosting our Indigenous Peoples Education  Program, and they have no reason not to finish their basic education because we provided them the Balay Paglaum that will translate their dreams in the past into the reality of tomorrow,201d she said.

On the other hand, Badua said, 201cOur main goal is to determine the best modes of delivering basic education to the IP communities in the city.201d 
While Patriarca extended his gratitude for the support of the partners in reviving the two schools that are seen to benefit the IP community.
 The tribal elders and parents of the students are greatly encouraged to be engaged in the implementation and monitoring of the program.
 
This collaboration also intends to help produce among the tribal young, effective leaders and advocates of the rights and aspirations of their communities.

LOOK: Things to know about Asean nations, LOOK: Things to know about Asean nationsKUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia -- The Association of Southeast Asian Nations  on Sunday signed a landmark declaration creating an Asean Community.
Key things to know about this diverse region, consisting of Brunei, Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Vietnam.
 
POPULATION
630 million people, accounting for almost 9 percent of the world's total population.
The region is more populous than the European Union which has 500 million and North America with 444 million people.
Largest member Indonesia has a population of 246 million, being the fourth populous country in the world.
The smallest member, Brunei, has only 412,000 people.
GOVERNMENT
10 member countries are governed by a variety of systems including elected democracies, monarchy, military junta, military-influenced civilian rule and Communist.
RELIGION
The region is home to a variety of ethnic groups, languages and religions.
Indonesia, for example, is almost 90 percent Muslim, while the Philippines is more than 80 percent Roman Catholic, and Thailand is more than 95 percent Buddhist.
Other religions include Hinduism, Sikhism and Taoism.
Among the 10 countries, summit host Malaysia is the most multi-cultural and multi-ethnic, comprising Malays, Chinese, Indians, Eurasians and indigenous tribes.
TIME ZONES
The region is spread over four time zones.
Four countries are 7 hours ahead of Greenwich Mean Time, including Indonesia, some of whose eastern provinces are 8 and 9 hours ahead.
Five countries are 8 hours ahead of GMT, while Myanmar is 6 hours and 30 minutes behind.
ECONOMY 
If Asean were a single country, it would be the seventh-largest economy in the world with a combined GDP of $2.4 trillion.
It is projected to double to $4.7 trillion by 2020, and would rank as the fourth-largest economy by 2050.
Indonesia represents almost 40 percent of the region's economic output while Myanmar is still a nascent market with poorly formed institutions.

The countries represent a range of economic development.
The GDP of Singapore, one of the richest countries in the world, is more than 30 times higher than in Laos and more than 50 times higher than in Cambodia and Myanmar.
DRIVING 
Five of the countries drive on the left side of the road and half on the other.
In Myanmar, most cars are designed for driving on the left side, but traffic follows the European and American system.

Masbad: Syncing photos: Device to laptop and back, Masbad: Syncing photos: Device to laptop and backRoark L.
Masbad, Wacky Tech, WE'VE all faced this problem before.
We have tons of photos in our mobile devices and we wanna transfer them straight to our laptops without having to go through the hassle of backing up your device2019s data.
What2019s even more difficult is when you have a photo in your laptop that you want to transfer to your device.
For a lot of us, we2019d email it to ourselves or Dropbox it to ourselves.

I2019ve been in that road before and, thankfully, found a solution via an app.
It2019s called Photo Sync.
It2019s both available for iOS and Android and you can download directly from their website.
There are tons of information in their site as well that you can go through before deciding to actually download and install in your device.

Aside from the app that you download for your device, there2019s also a companion app that you need to download for your computer.
Install it and from there, it2019s eezy breezy.

Once installed in your computer , I recommend keeping that app on your dock to make life even easier during the times you2019ll transfer photos.

If you need to transfer a photo from your laptop to your device what you need to do are:
* Open the app on your device and make sure it2019s the active app.

* Go back to your laptop, select the photos you want to transfer, drag them to the app2019s dock icon and drop it there.
* After dropping it there, it will open the app2019s window and will automatically transfer to photos to your device without you having to do anything else.

If it2019s the other way around:
* Open both apps.
Don2019t worry if you don2019t see any active window on your computer.
As long as it2019s already launched, it2019s there.

* On your device, go back to the app window.
If you2019ve given it access to your Photos already, you2019ll see all the photos stored in your device.
* Select the photos you want to transfer, tap on that red icon at the top-left portion of the app.
It will open a window and ask you whether to send the photos that are 201cNew201d, 201cSelected201d and 201cAll201d.
Of course, tap on 201cSelected201d.
After that, the apps will take care of the transfer.

* On your computer, go to the Pictures  folder.
You can change the location or folder where the app will store those photos that you transfer.
This app has been a bane for me especially since I do photography with a camera.
And I shoot RAW images almost all the time.
I post process these photos on my laptop, of course.
I don2019t need to email it to myself anymore or wait for Dropbox to finish syncing folders so I can get the same file in my iPhone.

Just a few simple steps with the app and I2019m done.
It won2019t even take me more than two minutes to do the transfer.

If you2019re such a shutterbug, I highly recommend that you have this app in your device and your laptop.
You2019ll thank me for it.

Happy shooting!
Using technology to see , Using technology to see 
DAVAO.
Using technology to see.

Ace June Rell S.
Perez, IN A fast changing, evolving world driven by technology creating massive change and disruption that have forever altered the way people interact, we are seeing lightning-fast innovation and there is no other way but to cope, adapt, and catch up, able or not.

With computer-aged era, we use our hearing senses for appreciating audio and capturing messages, hands for manipulating the keyboards and other parts of the computer, and eyes for seeing what on the screen, envisioning the graphics, and other visual purposes.

For many, in order to ride the digital change one must have these physical capabilities to maximize the advantages of technology but for some, it only takes courage and eagerness to learn to be in the loop.
In the light of giving and enabling those who need more attention to cope with the digital era when computer skills are already a necessity more than just an additional skill, IBM Philippines continues its commitment to enable visually-challenged public school students to be a computer literate through its National Computer Camp for Blind Students or "Computer Eyes" program.
Computer Eyes is a joint program of IBM and the non-government organization  Resources for the Blind.
It provides training in basic and advance computer programs and how to surf the Internet using special software to young low-vision and blind students in a span of 40-hour sessions.
In a recent graduation ceremony of the 27 visually-challenged student beneficiaries from Mindanao and Visayas in Davao City last November 12, the before hopeless and unequipped students were radically turned to an optimistic and armed individuals ready to conquer the high tech world.
"With the program, I was encouraged more to lift myself to a higher heights, before I thought that people like us, visually-impaired, akala ko hindi ko kaya, hindi ko kayang mag upgrade to the point that I thought that I am only bound to be in the house only, I haven't realize that I can indeed upgrade my skills, even with computer, not until now, "Josephine R.
Abanto, a grade nine student with a congenital Glaucoma condition shared.
The 18-year-old student also shared that she now sees her condition not a hindrance to pursue her dreams but an inspiration to those individuals sharing the same situation as her to strive and thrive.
Abanto dreamed of becoming a professional singer and a special education  teacher.
"I am after teaching those who are like me, teach them what I learned and give them hope and knowledge to see the brighter side of life," she added.
A grade 10 student named Joji Brix Relatado, a 16 years old lad with a Subluxated lens that gives him a low-vision condition, wishes to also share his knowledge gained from the training to his friends with the same condition as him.
He dreams to be a lawyer someday.
"It really helped, not just by providing us technical assistance but leveling up our self confidence and on how we view our self-worth," Relatado said.
"It made us reaffirm that disability is no hindrance, it is not a reason to succumb but rather a challenge to be faced as we strive hard for excellence," he added.
He added that with the training, he has improved his knowledge on how to manipulate and navigate the computer especially in basic computer applications like document processing, spreadsheet calculations, power point, webpage creation thru Hyper Text Markup Language , including use of social media networks.
Ebenchito M.
Pabia, one of the program's instructors, who is also a visually-impaired individual, for his part said that they can prove the world wrong that they can also do what normal people does.

"I told my students that these digital and technology-driven days, it is already a need for them to master how to take advantage from these things, we need to equipped ourselves with the necessary skills, so as not to be left behind," he said adding that they can do whatever normal students can, even outstand them.
The program leverages on a software called Jobs Access With Speech .
The application converts text display into speech and allows users to navigate through the computer through audio prompts.
"In our aim to create an inclusive youth enablement program, IBM continues to support RBI on this endeavor," Pineda said adding that the program allows them to reach out to members of the uniquely-abled community and provide them useful skills and better opportunities for a better future.
For its 13th year, the program has produced over 340 graduates nationwide.

Enabling eyes to see what is beyond is maximizing our true gift of senses and this is by far the best way to keep stride with the ever changing world.

Getting the big picture, Getting the big picture
A Steady Hand, a steadfast faith.
Sun.Star photojournalist Allan Cuizon likes to build remote-controlled aircraft, then take photos with them.
Ready, aim, take off: Sun.Star2019s photojournalists are taking field work to new heights
, AS A child, Allan Cuizon dreamt of flight.

Although he ended up in a different line of work, Cuizon never entirely let that dream go.
When the challenges of work and home life allowed it, he spent his time learning about such things as flight dynamics or fiddling with remote-controlled model aircraft, often built from scratch.
In January 2014, dream and duty aligned.

He attached a digital point-and-shoot camera to a quadcopter he had made himself, flew the rig above a bridge in Bohol that was being fixed after the great quake, and took pictures that were different from those of all the other journalists at the same site.
Aerial photographs offer a new perspective, Cuizon says.
They show extent more effectively than photographs snapped at ground level.
They allow viewers a better grasp of how large or how widespread the effects of a news event are.
They also show familiar scenes from a new angle.

For the photojournalist, however, using remotely piloted aircraft  or unmanned aerial vehicles 2014more popularly known as drones2014creates a new set of challenges.
On the ground, photojournalists can focus on composition and capturing an event at the right moment.
Some things they can2019t control, like how much light is available as the news breaks.
The few, like Cuizon, who both take pictures and fly RPAs have to think about several other details besides.
They can2019t control how the wind will behave while their rigs are airborne.
Flight time is limited2014no more than 15 to 20 minutes2014so they have to cover as much of an area as they can, before they land and recharge.
Cuizon says he2019s learned to take off fast, before the sight of Sun.Star Cebu2019s DJI Phantom 2 quadcopter attracts a crowd .

201cBefore taking off, I survey the area I need to cover.
I identify the points where I need the quadcopter to go,201d Cuizon says.
When a crowd builds up around him, it can get nerve-wracking, he admits.
He is particularly thankful that, after one quadcopter he had made crashed in Cordova, no one was hurt, and Sun.Star Cebu President and General Manager Julius 201cJJ201d Neri, Jr.
encouraged him to keep flying.
It was Neri who introduced 201cdrone photojournalism201d to Sun.Star Cebu, even to the extent of covering events himself in the early days.
201cOur first major aerial coverage was the  fluvial parade in 2013,201d Neri recalled.
His shots, taken over the Cebu pier as the boat bearing the Sto.
Ni\xf1o docked, showed that from above, the dancers welcoming the Ni\xf1o home had formed , something that looked like rosary beads in the early morning light.
Neri began to operate quadcopters in 2011, but has been competitively flying remote-controlled aircraft for around 25 years.
201cI introduced this  to Sun.Star because I saw this as the wave of the future for photojournalism,201d he said.
201cIt offers a whole new perspective.201d
201cI also saw it as an opportunity for us to further differentiate ourselves from the competition,201d he added.

The urge to take photos from way above is deep-seated.

201cJournalists and photographers ascended in hot air balloons during the 19th century to cover battles and other events.
During the 20th century many media used fixed-wing aircraft and, later, helicopters to cover events from above,201d observed David Goldberg, Mark Corcoran and Robert G.
Picard in 201cOpportunities and Challenges of Drones in News Gathering,201d a study posted by the Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism.
RPAs, while by no means cheap, are far more affordable than renting helicopters for news coverage.
They2019re also arguably safer.
For Sun.Star Cebu, which today marks its 33rd year, using RPAs has brought unheard-of convenience and unprecedented images.

And while it is a fairly recent practice, the use of quadcopters has helped create memorable images that have enriched Sun.Star2019s coverage, both in print and online.
Supporters and armchair athletes who couldn2019t get a firsthand look at the swim leg of the last two Ironman 70.3 races in Cebu had only to search for Cuizon2019s video, taken from the prow of a motor banca, to see what that leg of the race looked like.

For Cuizon, whose passions include architecture, 201cdrone journalism201d has also offered the chance to see the city2019s layout better.
Many familiar buildings look interesting again from above.

201cAerial photographs and video add context to story, provide rich illustrations of the scale of crowds, impact of natural disasters, flooding or drought, and allow photography in locations photographers cannot reach because of dangers or impediments to access,201d the Reuters study pointed out.
Take a look at some of the images Cuizon has taken from 15 to 400 feet above ground.
Don2019t they make you see the story better?
Renowned experts to speak at 2015 Conference on Giftedness  , Renowned experts to speak at 2015 Conference on Giftedness  PARTICIPANTS and advocates from across Southeast Asia are expected to gather at the Annual Conference on Giftedness hosted by the Philippine Center for Gifted Education Inc.
 in partnership with Promil Pre-School at The Heritage Hotel Manila from November 29 to 30.
World Council for Gifted and Talented Children President Dr.
Leslie Graves will share her insights on addressing learning challenges in brilliant minds as keynote speaker.
She will be arriving in the country from Ireland this week.
Dr.
Marcelo Ang will discuss ways of motivating children to unleash their innate creativity and innovativeness.
He is the acting director of the Advanced Robotics Center of the National University of Singapore and member of the Advisory Council of the World Robot Olympiad.
Joining Graves and Ang at the conference are noted Philippine government women leaders Commission on Higher Education Chair Dr.
Patricia Licuanan, University of the Philippines-Manila Chancellor Dr.
Carmencita Padilla, and Department of Science and Technology Director Dr.
Josette Biyo.
201cWe enjoin the support of all stakeholders in the crucial task of empowering our human capital by together understanding and addressing evolving challenges,201d PCGE president Dr.
Leticia Ho said.
201cWe are pleased to partner with PCGE in supporting parents and advocates in the region as we strengthen our joint efforts to nurture giftedness.
We believe that a child whose gifts are nurtured can reach his full potential and make a valuable contribution to society,201d said Promil Pre-School product manager Dian Yu.
According to the Department of Education, there are 1.27 million gifted children in the country  who have the potential to demonstrate exceptional abilities with proper guidance and support.

What is happiness according to a yoga teacher, What is happiness according to a yoga teacher
CEBU.
Brahma Kumaris Sister Denise Lawrence talks about 'The Healing Power of Happiness.' She has pioneered the establishment of Brahma Kumaris Centres and taught meditation methods and spiritual knowledge.

A SPIRITUAL teacher and practitioner of Raja Yoga meditation, Brahma Kumaris  Sister Denise Lawrence reminded the public in a press conference Thursday of what happiness is really about, citing the problems and issues the world is facing right now, including materialism among the youth.
Raja Yoga, also known as classical yoga or simply yoga, is concerned principally with the cultivation of the mind using meditation to control and subdue mental fluctuations in order to still the mind and achieve liberation , according to New World Encyclopedia.
Lawrence said that people nowadays seem to have misunderstood what happiness is.
"People are spiritually depleted.
Living in a predominantly materialistic society, a lot of people have abandoned their spiritual side and no longer know how to resource themselves spiritually."
She said the people need the element of being able to participate in a healing process that will help develop in the search of happiness, since "there can be no real happiness until the soul finds its peace."
"Happiness is really the purpose of life.
That2019s why we are here on Earth to experience happiness, to share happiness, to enjoy happiness," she said.
Happiness, for her, is a very deep inner experience that arises in a sustainable way when one does some kind of charity, some kind of act of benefit to another human being.
And when one does that, that person will actually experience real and lasting happiness, she said.
She mentioned three ingredients of happiness: having enough money, good health and good relationships.
Lawrence, 63, travels extensively to give lectures, conduct seminars, and conferences on spiritual practice and yoga or meditation.
She is in Cebu City to give a talk on the healing power of happiness.
As a Raja Yoga teacher for the BK Centres, Lawrence gives meditation courses to recovering narcotic addicts at several facilities of the Los Angeles prison system.
She has also presented television programmes on Raja Yoga meditation methods and spiritual knowledge, as well as on addiction recovery.
Brahma Kumaris Centres, which she has pioneered, is a nonsectarian and non-government organization that accepts people from all walks of life, religion, race or creed, and "seeks to help people rediscover goodness from within and encourage the development of spiritual awareness, attitude and behavior through meditation." 
From lawbreaker to law enforcer    , From lawbreaker to law enforcer    Jeepy P.
Compio, AS A minor, he used to be a law breaker but fate had turned his world upside down and led him to become a law enforcer instead.
 With no parents to take care of him, the young Weltor Helborion who is now a 24-year old police officer 1, grew up on the streets as one of the many children in conflict with the law.
 
He even became a member of the Inosenteng Demonyo Gang in Isla Verde in Davao City once.
But all of these ended when he was rescued by the Sta.
Ana Police in Davao City last summer of 2002 and this led him into a different phase.
 
Since then he has found his refuge at the Sta.
Ana Police Station and felt for the first time that someone did care about him and that was when he started a new journey doing regular chores at the station.

"I used to clean the rooms, sweep the floor, clean the Comfort Room and resort to cook food for the cops because I love doing all of it," Helborion said in an interview with Sun.Star SuperBalita.

"I am not ashamed of my past because without it, I will not be where I am today.
I am so thankful to all the Sta.
Ana police because they were the ones who brought me out of the mess I was in.
They had rescued me and motivated me to do good in my studies,201d P01 Helborion shared with teary eyes.
  
He spent his elementary years at Sta.
Ana Central Elementary School and finished his secondary education at Sta.
Ana National High School in 2006, dreaming of becoming a policeman while doing the tasks assigned to him and getting guidance from the Women and Children's Protection Desk .
Ignited by the desire to become a policeman someday, Helborion took a degree in Bachelor of Science in Criminology  at the Mats College of Technology, graduated in 2012, and eventually joined the police training for Police Officer 1.
 
"I did my best on my studies and even became a student assistant at the Mats College under the supervision of my boss, Attorney Semporiano Alterado Sr., who was one of the people who supported me in my college days,201d Helborion narrated.
When he had finally completed his degree in 2012, passed the criminology licensure examination.
 
"After ng board exam, nagpapasalamat ako sa Diyos na may tao na nagtulong sa akin kung paano ko sisimulang hakbangin ang daan, many thanks, special mention to the present chief of WCPD-DCPO Police Chief Inspector Liza Ramirez," he shared.

Former director Senior Superintendent Jaime H.
Morente of the Police Regional Office  in Davao region appointed him as a striker of his team.
Here are his trainings and titles, including his assignments.
The Basic Recruit Course  in Regional Training School Center; PNP-Special Counter-Insurgency Operation Unit Training  Class Alpha & Bravo; Regional Public Safety Battalion  in Davao region in 3rd maneuver company; Jose Abad Santos Police Station in Davao Occidental and currently assigned in Panabo Police Station in Davao del Norte Provincial Police Office .

"Even though I was a product of a broken family and though I was raised by a poor family, I did not let it hinder me from pursuing my dreams.
No one should use their past as an excuse to not reach their goals.
There is always a way to pursue our dreams," Helborion said.

"To all the aspiring police officers today, they should not lose hope and pray to God because it is him who will guide us to where he would want us to be.201d  Helborion2019s life story is of great value and serves as a living testimony to others.
His story is a proof that every minute and every second of our lives must not be wasted.
 
Helborion is now married to Klarisse Coronel-Helborion who is an elementary teacher of Island Garden City of Samal  in Davao del Norte.
 
Positively Living , Positively Living Riain Alfonso, AS THE world commemorates the World AIDS Day on Tuesday, December 1, advocates of Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome  in Cagayan de Oro City are organizing various events to raise more awareness on HIV and AIDS, help improve the plight of the people living with it and raise funds to propel more HIV-AIDS campaigns such as free HIV testing to encourage more to get tested.

Most people think of sob stories with regard to the disease and not everyone knows that there are actually positive stories out there especially with person/s living with HIV .
 
Here are three life stories of people who, upon finding out of their positive status, are still able to live positive and productive lives.
The early detection of their disease contributed greatly to the positive outcomes of each of the stories below.

The raised awareness of what HIV and AIDS is all about and the elimination of stigma is what each story aspires to achieve.

Shaf97
Shaf97 is thirty-five years old who works as waiter in a bar here in the city.
He chose this moniker because it holds a special meaning to him.
The number 97 denotes that he was patient 97 in a treatment hub in Western Mindanao, where he hails from, for plHIV.
201cMy story began when I was still in Dubai and I got raped,201d shared Shaf, 201cI worked in the UAE for eight years as cashier in an American Restaurant.201d Before going to Dubai, he saw himself as straight and had a girlfriend but had confusing feelings for other men.
He had already been working for three years when the incident happened.
He was working the night shift when a customer called to order takeout.
201cNung pinick up nya yung order nya sa restaurant, he asked for my number.201d  The customer, an Arab policeman, said he just wanted to make friends with me, 201cKasi gusto daw nya ang mga Filipinos.201d
They started chatting up and, after three weeks, Shaf agreed to meet up for a friendly outing.
A bit naive, he believed that it was going to be an innocent jaunt.
The Arab, instead, brought him to the middle of the desert and, threatened him with a gun, Shaf had no other recourse but to give in to what he wanted.
201cTinali nya ang kamay ko gamit ang Keffiyeh niya and ginawa niya yung gusto niyang gawin sa akin.
He removed all my clothes and he forced me.
Yun na.201d
201cAfter nun, tinakot niya ako.
If magsusumbong daw ako, may gagawin daw siyang mas worse pa.
Nagmakaawa ako sa kanya na ibalik niya ako sa accommodation ko.
Sabi ko, hindi talaga ako magsusumbong.201d Luckily, the Arab brought him back to where he was staying and let him go without further harm.
He was bleeding heavily and was not able to work for three days.

For more than a month nothing else happened until the Arab man started contacting him again.
201cParang sinusuyo niya ako, sabi niya it2019s better na maging kami na lang.201d Shaf, out of fear and because he also started feeling something for the man, agreed to the proposition as he fell in love with his violator.
201cSabi nila, kapag may boyfriend ka daw na police, secured ka.
So mas preferred ko na din na ganun, for security.
Every time na nagmemeet kami, pinaparamdam niya sa akin na special ako.
Naging partner ko siya for almost three years.201d 
But Shaf was not satisfied.
Despite being in a relationship, he started to see other men on the side, charging them for sex.
After work, he would go out prostituting himself.
 201cHinahanap-hanap ko na.
Para bang napariwara ako, naging sex maniac na ako.
I2019m not contented with one person only.
But I only go out with the people I was attracted to and had money too.201d
He admits that he found his lifestyle fun and that he was enjoying himself.
He was actually getting paid for something he liked to do.
201cNa enjoy ko siya kasi it2019s easy.
 Madali lang maghanap ng pera.201d 
201cAko yung breadwinner sa family ko kaya gusto ko magkaroon ng extra income,201d he said.
He was putting two of his brothers to school and was also paying for the medical maintenance of his parents.
The money he earned selling his body was almost doubled from what he was earning as cashier, sending almost all home to his family.
201cNagtitira lang ako ng pang-allowance ko.201d
During the entire time, Shaf was engaging in risky behavior by having unprotected sex with his clients.
He never thought of the consequence, that getting sick was a possibility.
 The thrill, the danger, these all excited him.
In 2010, he transferred to Saudi Arabia and worked for another company.
There, he continued his risky lifestyle.
He entertained six to 10 clients some nights, all still without protection.
201cMy night is not complete if walang nangyayari.201d In 2012, after a brief vacation home, he went back and was asked to do a medical checkup.
He was already starting to lose weight, was experiencing on and off diarrhea, and had rashes in some parts of his body.
201cSickly na ako, parating may fever.
Pero hindi ko inintindi.
Sa isip ko, siguro overfatigue kasi after work ko, lalabas pa ako, madaling araw na umuuwi tapos kinabukasan, work na naman.201d
The hospital called three days after the checkup, telling him he had to do more tests.
 201cMay something wrong daw sa result ng blood tests ko.201d He went through more tests and, after several days of anxiety waiting for the results, he was asked to report back.
201cThe hospital called, need daw ako kausapin personally.
Ang sinabi nila sa akin, AIDS daw.
 Parang na wala na ako sa sarili ko, this is the end of my life.
Nasira lahat ng mga pangarap ko.201d
He came home and was tested again in his province and was told that he was actually HIV+, that it has not yet become full-blown AIDS.
201cNahirapan ako mag accept,201d but because of the counseling he received at the treatment hub, he was slowly able to accept his condition, 201cNakatulong ng malaki yung mga peer educators namin.201d Lucky for Shaf, his condition was diagnosed early and he was able to start ARV treatment when he needed to.
Since December of 2013, Shaf97 has been undergoing ARV treatment to help suppress the HIV virus and hinder the progression of the disease.
201cI think of my ARV meds as my partner, I need to take them.
I need to live long para sa family ko rin.201d
Despite the fact that the family members he told of his condition accepted him and were supportive, Shaf97 still chose to transfer to CdeO because he wanted to get away from the stigma he was getting from some people in his hometown.
He is now in a relationship with someone who is also living with HIV and does volunteer work as a peer educator, 201cPart kasi siya ng advocacy ko, to spread awareness about HIV and AIDS to other people.201d 
Bobby Agaran
201cI am already thirty-three years old and was diagnosed in June 2013,201d shared Bobby.
 201cDuring that time I was already stage 3, AIDS stage na.201d
It all started with a mild cough which steadily progressed until he got hospitalized for pneumonia.
He was drastically losing weight and was getting sicker and sicker, 201cNatingala ko kay maski unsa akong inumon na tambal, dili ko gaka uli-an.201d Aside from the cough, he was also experiencing headaches, fever, rashes, and diarrhea.
His doctor was baffled when the meds they gave him for pneumonia, which initially worked, started to fail.
There had to be a reason why.
The doctor asked Bobby questions about his lifestyle and he received several alarming answers.
Bobby identifies himself as bisexual but is more attracted to women and had sex with men only for the pleasure of it.
He worked as the officer-in-charge in a store in Manila where, buff, fit, and a very carefree single man, he engaged in risky sexual behavior with several people.
201cGaka-meet ra nako sa mga bars, and pagnaay na ka-istorya, nagkasinabot, ug game sila, diretso na dayun.
Sometimes protected, sometimes unprotected, dili ko consistent when it comes sa ingon ana.201d 
201cDili pod ko gakuyog ug bayot kay sa akong huna-huna sa una sila ang gadala sa sakit.
 But I was wrong diay, ang mga bisexual na tago mao man diay ang high risk kaayo when it comes to sex.201d
Fearing the worse, the doctor asked Bobby to get tested for HIV.
After a week2019s wait, the doctor came back with the results, 201cThe doctor said, it is confirmed, positive daw ko.
 When I heard that, natulala ko.
Dili nako ma explain akong emotion at that time.
Dili ko talahilak.
Pero pagstorya sa doctor, nitulo na lang akong luha.201d
201cI wasn2019t thinking of my status, sa akong situation.
Wala sa akong mind ang akong sakit.
 I was thinking more on sa kaulaw.
Ma-accept pa ba ko sa akong parents.
I was thinking of the humiliation, the stigma, the discrimination.
I was feeling hopeless.
Dili nako ma accept akong self, naay self stigma.
Akong hunahuna kay it2019s better to die than to live with the shame.201d
Bobby sees himself as lucky because the doctor who spoke to him was well equipped to handle the situation.
201cIngon siya na dili ko mabalaka kay there is still hope.
Ana siya na naay treatment, kinahanglan lang na mauli-an sa ko sa akong pneumonia.
I-make sure lang jud daw na mu-strive ko, maningkamot ko maayo kay stage 3 AIDS na ko.201d
And true enough, only a few people who reach the AIDS stage ever recover from it.
 201cWhen I heard na naay hope, I fought for my life.
Nag struggle jud ko na mabuhi.201d 
What helped him find the courage to fight was the support and love he got from his family.
He started ARV treatment by September of 2013 and has been taking his meds religiously since then.

In the beginning, he was ashamed to be seen by other people but his sister and mother convinced him to start going out, 201cIf you2019re not going to accept yourself, you will not totally recover sa imong situation.
Ang gisulti sa akong mama, 2018You must learn to accept your status para maka go on ka sa imong life.2019 If in denial ka, you are just killing yourself, dili ka maka recover emotionally if dili nimo i-face ang reality.201d 
It also helped that he was able to meet other people also living with HIV and got to talk to people who are in the same boat as he is.
201cImportante kaayo na naa kay ma-istorya, na naay mga tao na nakasabot jud sa imong gina experience.201d He is one of the founding officers of NorMAA or Northern Mindanao AIDS Advocates, an HIV/AIDS support group formed by people living with HIV.

Currently, Bobby is back to stage 1, acute HIV infection, and through the help of the ARV treatment, he hopes to remain at this stage.
He has gained back his weight and is very careful with his health.
201cNakita namo ang paglaum through ARV.
If amo lang siya i-take faithfully, we can live a normal life.201d
Red Fox 
Red Fox, a thirty-three year old gay man, did not have a great relationship with his parents growing up.
201cNag layas-layas ko and mas nag experiment ko samot sa akong sexuality.201d He admits to have had several risky sexual encounters in the past, his use of protection was inconsistent.
He, however, believes that his experimentation with injectable drugs got him infected with HIV.

In 2012, while in Manila, he met with two other men who invited him to 2018partee and play2019 or PnP, basically a hook up involving drugs and sex.
201cWhen they said na mag 2018partee2019, like mag take mi ug drugs, I was thinking na Ecstasy.201d He got the shock of his life when one of the men took out a pouch and produced a syringe.
He was a bit nervous because, although he tried drugs before, this would be his first time with injections.
 Being a bit of a daredevil, and seeing that it was a fresh syringe, he agreed to try.
They all got high, had sex, did a follow up, had more sex.

He met with these people several more times and each time they would inject at least twice or thrice.
201cThey2019re good looking, insakto pod ilang lawas, they speak good.
 Nagpadala ko.
Kumpyansa ra pod ko kaayo then high na kaayo ko, wala na ko sa akong hunahuna.
Dili na nako mabantayan if ang mga follow, fresh gihapon ang syringe.201d The meetings only stopped when he had a realization after seeing the phrase 2018protect yourself2019 in a pouch ironically given to him by one of the men he 2018party2019 with.
He came home to CdeO late in 2012 and thought that was the end to it.
Chalking everything up to experience.
In 2013, however, two of his friends died in succession due to complications because of AIDS and Red Fox started to get scared.
He was already starting to lose weight drastically and had no appetite, had a lump appear in his nape, and was even shitting blood at times.
201cNahadlok ko.
What if maparehas ko sa ila.
Nagflashback sa akong mind ang akong mga high risk na behavior, katong sa drugs-drugs.201d
When he was younger, rumors of him having HIV/AIDS started circulating which made him depressed to the point of suicide.
It also gave him an aversion to having himself tested because he feared that people might talk about it, 201cMahadlok ko mag pa test.
 Basig i-panabi ko sa mga nurses, basig lahi ang ilang panan-aw sa ako.
Ug wala pud ko kabalo asa muadto.201d
He learned of the Alliance Against AIDS in Mindanao, Inc.
 through postings he saw and messages he received online and in gay-friendly apps, 201cBasig mao na ni na time na mag-patest na ko.201d He finally got tested after meeting up with people from ALAGAD, one of whom went with him to the hospital for support.
201cPagkabalo nako sa akong status, I was depressed.
I was scared.
Gahuna-huna ko na magpasagad na lang ko kay total feeling nako hapit na man siguro ko mamatay because I got this.
Pero nahunahuna pud nako na I would talk to my counselor and ma-minaw ko sa iyang advices and ma-minaw sa akong mga kauban, katong mga other plHIV na na met nako.201d Red Fox said he cried when he received his results but he was also somewhat expecting it to be positive.
201cIt helped me a lot that I got to talk to my fellow plHIV.201d
ARV treatment for Red Fox started in March of 2014.
201cSo far, treatment nako, okay man sad.
Wala koy mga adverse reactions or side effects na na feel.
I feel normal.
I feel the same.
I feel very healthy and happy because I have no major complaints sa health ko.201d
Red Fox found out early this year that one of the men he 201cparteed201d with died of AIDS complication back in 2013.
He also believes that he was infected on purpose because back in 2012, he received weird 2018how2019s your health2019 and 2018have you been feeling okay2019 text messages from one of the men.
201cKung gituyo man to nila, I forgive them.
Para pud sa akong peace of mind.201d
Living with HIV doesn2019t stop Red Fox from living.
201cIt2019s not too late na magbuhat pa ka sa imong gusto buhaton.201d
After being diagnosed, Red Fox2019s life made a 360 degree turn.
He no longer does recreation drugs and is in fact now trying to finish his nursing degree.
Since his diagnosis, his relationship with his parents is much better, 201cIt was a major turn of events kay ayha pa hinoon nako na feel na appreciated and loved ko sa akong family.201d 
He said his experiences made him emotionally stronger and that, although he isn2019t proud of it, he has no regrets.
Philippine tarsiers now among most endangered primates, Philippine tarsiers now among most endangered primates
The Philippine tarsier
ITS being a mascot for Philippine tourism has helped raise awareness for its conservation, but such gain could not outweigh its joining the ranks of the world's 25 most endangered primates also from the same reason.
Its popularity with visitors to Bohol, where it is a tourism mascot, is one reason it has landed on the latest edition of "Primates in Peril: The world's 25 most endangered primates."
Both threatened by habitat loss, the tarsier and the Lavasoa Mountains dwarf lemur of Madagascar are the newest addition to the list released November 25 by the International Union for Conservation of Nature .
"Many populations of Philippine tarsiers have already been locally extirpated and of those that remain some surely are at imminent risk of extinction," according to the IUCN's "Primates in Peril: The World's 25 Most Endangered Primates 2014-2016."
Tarsiers are scattered over Samar, Leyte, Bohol and Mindanao and in an unknown number of smaller islands such as Dinagat and Basilan.
Modern genetic tools reveal that Philippine tarsiers are a group of at least three evolutionary significant units, a population of organisms that is considered distinct for purposes of conservation.
Three tarsier subspecies have been described: T.
syrichta syrichta from Leyte and Samar; T.
s.
carbonarius from Mindanao; and T.
s.
fraterculnus from Bohol.
While tarsiers are used as a mascot in Bohol, the regulation of this tourism practice is weak.
Many tarsiers are on display at roadside attractions in conditions described by the report as "heartbreaking, especially as these are nocturnal animals on display during the daytime."
Given the difficulties of keeping tarsiers alive in captivity, it is assumed that mortality among these animals is high, and that replacements from the wild are found when they die, the report said.
"There is a burgeoning illegal trade in tarsiers as pets, which unfortunately, is probably promoted to some degree by the tarsiers' status as tourism mascots," it said, noting that while the use of tarsiers as tourism mascots is laudable, and proves their ability to promote tourism and thereby conservation, the industry in the Philippines is in desperate need of greater oversight.
"Unfortunately, owing to weak oversight, current practices are probably exacerbating the risk of extinction, and this needs correction," it said.

Another reason for the tarsier's inclusion on the list is forest destruction.
Noting that the Philippines has been described as a land of "mega deforestation," the report pointed out that "it remains unproven that non-forest habitats can sustain tarsier populations in perpetuity."
The Philippines has also been described as the region where "megadiversity meets mega deforestation," the report said, noting that the country ranks fourth on the list of the World's 10 Most Threatened Forest Hotspots, even ahead of Madagascar, a country that is infamous for its conservation crisis.
It said that as little as seven percent of the Philippines remain forested.

"This is particularly distressing since tarsiers may well be an obligate forest species, though this is unclear and is yet another question mark about Philippine tarsiers that must be resolved quickly," the report said.

Since deforestation has removed "nearly all" of the tarsier's original habitat in many places, the report continued, identifying the conservation priorities of the unique primate is urgent.
Global warming has also landed the tarsier on the list, as it reflects the need to understand how the increased frequency and intensity of typhoons will affect the extinction risk of tarsiers.
Super Typhoon Yolanda  in 2013 swept directly over critical tarsier habitat in Leyte and Samar.
The direct effect of the typhoon on tarsier conservation is still being studied, but it was "unquestionably devastating," IUCN said.

Remembering the Great Plebeian, Remembering the Great PlebeianUP TO this day, he is a well-known man.
His name, Andres Bonifacio, offers a sense of familiarity to the Filipinos -- vividly remembered as the indio who spearheaded the Katipunan, 201cthe first nationally successful revolution against the Spaniards201d in 1892.
Yet as much as his fame can offer, he is still less appreciated than the notable Filipino reformist, our national hero Jose Rizal.
In fact, today2019s youth do not remember his contributions for the country aside from being the 201cAma ng Katipunan.201d 
According to a survey conducted by the Social Weather Stations in 2011, 34 percent of 1,200 adults from all over the country named Bonifacio as one of the most identified heroes.
In fact, he places second after Jose Rizal, who gained 75 percent.
Bonifacio got 47 percent in Metro Manila, 35 percent in the Visayas, 34 percent in Balance Luzon, and 25 percent in Mindanao throughout the survey.
Yet how much do people really know about 201cThe Great Plebeian201d Andres Bonifacio?
Aaron, 15 years old and a high school student, remembers the Supremo solely as the founder of the Katipunan.
November 30 or August 30, he reluctantly said, was the hero2019s holiday.
When asked why it is celebrated on November 30, he answered 201cKay November 30 siya namatay ?201d
Michelle, 18, also named Bonifacio as the Father of KKK, noting that he was not an ilustrado, and was allegedly killed by Aguinaldo.
In addition to that, she said that November 30 is a commemoration of the hero2019s death.

Natalie, 18, dubbed the Supremo as the first president of the country and a historical personality who got greedy for power.
She also mentioned of him being the founder of the Katipunan.

201cBecause it helped our countrymen before to unite as one and fight for one purpose and with that, naka-inspire gihapon sa ato ang ilang nahimo ,201d she responded after being asked why the things Bonifacio did for the country are important for us now.
Bonifacio is perceived to be a brave leader who led many in the revolution against the Spaniards, our then colonizers.
But there is more to know about him than just his brand of being the leader of KKK.
Andres Bonifacio y de Castro was different from most of the well-known heroes in the country today.
For one, he was not an ilustrado.
He was a self-taught man who had History of the French Revolution, The Count of Monte Cristo, and Victor Hugo2019s Les Miserables in his reading list, aside from Rizal2019s La Solidaridad, Noli Me Tangere and El Filibusterismo, among others.
He formed the Kataastaasan Kagalang-galang na Katipunan nang nga Anak ng Bayan , simply known as the Katipunan, at the age of 29.
Yet the number one characteristic that distinguished him from the rest was his worldly views that centered on revolution.

Ilustrados did not desire radical revolution and immediate independence from Spain because of their 201crelatively well-off middle class educated background,201d said Jose Antonio Ferreros, a history instructor at the University of the Philippines Cebu.
201cBonifacio was one of the first people who articulated these views and actually manifested them on a national scale by organizing something like the Katipunan,201d Ferreros said.
201cThe Katipunan was the one that actually fought violently for radical revolution and independence from Spain.
To a certain extent, it was more successful than anything that came before it, that2019s why Bonifacio is remembered as a hero as well.201d
One of the most basic facts that most of the Filipinos do not know about Bonifacio, however, is that the holiday dedicated for him every November 30 is a commemoration of the day of his birth, not death.
201cYou have to remember that he  died because of infighting among the revolutionaries,201d said Ferreros.
201cAguinaldo semi-reluctantly ordered the assassination of Bonifacio.201d
In an ANC interview with De La Salle University professor Xiao Chua, Aguinaldo admitted through a letter that he killed Bonifacio "para sa kapakanan ng bayan."
"He had a letter in 1948 on his birthday na siya ay napilitan because of two people who told him, 'kung gusto mong mabuhay pa tayo at mapanatili ang kapanatagan ng pamahalaang mapaghimagsik ay dapat mapatupad mo ang utos ng Konseho de Giyera,'" said Chua.
Because of the circumstances of his death, the holiday is on his birthday 201cto celebrate his achievements in life.201d
Despite the ups and downs of his career and despite being compared to other renowned Filipino heroes like Jose Rizal and Emilio Aguinaldo, Bonifacio still has his own greatness worth praising.

201cHe was really the first one who spearheaded action,201d said Ferreros.
201cFor some people, they look to people whom they see as actually articulating these actions more concretely, and they find that hero in Bonifacio.
That2019s what makes him unique.201d
Though knowing the basics about the Filipino heroes is seemingly good enough for every Filipino citizen, understanding the concept deeper would be better and definitely would not hurt.
In fact, it would also improve one2019s background on the country2019s mysteries.
On the upcoming Bonifacio Day on November 30, would you remember Bonifacio beyond the Supremo fa\xe7ade? 
INTERACTIVE TIMELINE: The #DuterteSerye, INTERACTIVE TIMELINE: The #DuterteSerye
DuterteSerye
Nheru B.
Veraflor, DAVAO City Mayor Rodrigo Duterte was official declared on Monday, November 20, as the standard bearer of the Partido Demokratiko Pilipino-Lakas ng Bayan  for the 2016 polls.
Duterte reiterated Monday that he was never interested in running for president, but decided to do so to "save the country from being fractured."
He ended speculations on his political plans when he withdraw his certificate of candidacy  for Davao City mayor and filed his COC for president in Manila last November 27, eventually ending the #DuterteSerye, which trended on social media for months.
But while Duterte is now busy with his plans and goals in running a country of more than 102 million people, let's take a look at the events before Duterte announced his presidential bid.
Browse through this interactive timeline.
Clicking on the link will bring you to related stories.
Doctor2019s passion is helping treat Sagada2019s ailing kids, Doctor2019s passion is helping treat Sagada2019s ailing kidsLarry P.
Fabian, TWO indigent children diagnosed with congenital heart disease have been given a new chance at life, thanks to the efforts of a doctor who has fallen in love with Sagada, the popular tourist destination in Mountain Province.

Dr.
Philip Del Carmen, a consultant and pediatrician at the St.
Luke2019s Medical Center, raised the funds so that six-year-old Vhanny Bagni and Juvyliza Aligo could have surgery to repair their heart.
Del Carmen, who first visited Sagada during his pre-med days at the University of the Philippines in Diliman, admits to falling in love with the place and its people.

In 1998, he returned to Sagada as part of St.
Luke2019s medical mission.
It was there that he saw the hardships of a town that had only one doctor to look after the entire community.
Since then, Del Carmen returns to Sagada twice a year to conduct his own medical missions.
Last year, Del Carmen suspected that some young indigents, including Vhanny and Juvyliza, were suffering from congenital heart disease , but he needed laboratory tests to confirm his diagnosis.
The results revealed that Vhanny needed immediate surgery, but it would cost P200,000 in hospital and surgical fees.
With the help of a doctor from the Philippine General Hospital and Pediatric Cardiologist-Surgeon Dr.
Jonas Del Rosario, the fee for Vhanny2019s operation was reduced to P85,000.
A patient of Del Carmen2019s at St.
Luke2019s shouldered the rest of the fee.
Vhanny was operated on in July of 2014.
This year, Juvyliza had surgery at the Philippine Heart Center.
Del Carmen said he was able to raise P45,000 in just two hours.
201cI am thankful also to the PHC and Dr.
Juliet Banderas, who opened their doors to these indigent patients, while lowering their fees to accommodate these patient2019s needs,201d Del Carmen said.\xa0
But del Carmen2019s mission doesn2019t end there.
To raise more funds for other CHD patients in Sagada, he put up a photo exhibit of his picture in Sagada dubbed 201cDagdagop: A Gathering201d at the Caf\xe9 by the Ruins.
The exhibit will run from November 19 to January 9, 2016.
Caf\xe9 by the Ruins, upon learning of the photo exhibit2019s purpose waived the fees, Del Carmen said.
201cI am also thankful to my wife, Maria Cristina for being supportive of my advocacy, and understanding me why I needed to go back to Sagada, twice a year for 17 years of conducting my medical missions,201d Del Carmen said.
Zuckerberg is a dad, and he's giving away most of his money, Zuckerberg is a dad, and he's giving away most of his money
In this undated photo provided by Mark Zuckerberg, Max Chan Zuckerberg is held by her parents, Mark Zuckerberg and Priscilla Chan Zuckerberg.
Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg and his wife announced the birth of their daughter, Max, as well as plans to donate most of their wealth to a new organization that will tackle a broad range of the world's ills.

SAN FRANCISCO -- Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg and his wife announced the birth of their daughter Max as well as plans to donate most of their wealth, or roughly $45 billion, to a new organization that will tackle a broad range of the world's ills.
Zuckerberg's wife, Priscilla Chan, gave birth last week to a baby girl.
The couple didn't put out the news until Zuckerberg posted it Tuesday on 2014 of course 2014 Facebook.
In the same post, Zuckerberg said he and Chan will commit 99 percent of their Facebook stock to such causes as fighting disease, improving education, harnessing clean energy, reducing poverty and promoting equal rights.
They are forming a new organization, called the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative, to pursue those goals.

Cebu Normal University choir wins at international choral fest, Cebu Normal University choir wins at international choral fest
Cebu Normal University Children and Youth Choir 
PENANG, Malaysia -- The Cebu Normal University Children and Youth Choir  returned triumphant from the 7th A Voyage of Songs International Choral Festival.
CNUCYC, the youngest group to compete, receive a Silver A Diploma in both Equal Voices Junior Youth Category and in the Folklore Category.
Directed by Nino James Banares and assisted by mentors Jessica Moroscallo and Jandel Cabasura, the 25-children and youth ensemble wowed the judges and audience with their rendition of "Tagu-tago" by Bien Constantino, "Salve Regina" by Ivan Yohan, and "Salmo 117" by Joy T.
Nilo.
The A Voyage of Songs International Choral Festival is one of Asia Pacific2019s premier choral festivals that attract choirs from all over the world.
The objective of the festival is to promote greater appreciation of choral music, especially in the Asia-Pacific region, through an exchange of music and culture between choristers from different countries and the various judges.
This would strengthen the choral movement in the region and establish friendships among the participants.
This year, the CNUCYC competed and performed with 22 other choirs from Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia and choir groups from the Philippines.

Hassle-free shopping and best deals online, Hassle-free shopping and best deals onlineWITH Christmas Day fast approaching, it is expected that malls will be flocked with people buying for presents.

Hence, when shopping for gadgets that you could buy as presents for your loved ones, friends or relatives, it is best that you check out online stores for the most bang-for-the-buck deals.
If you are looking for the best deal for a laptop, you could check out the Facebook page of the Davao Futurebright Enterprises where you could find the biggest discounts on the latest MSI gaming laptops.

Among its best deals is its MSI GP60 2QF.
It is one of the top-of-the-line gaming laptops out in the market but you can't find it malls around the city.

Its original is P52,995 but Davao Futurebright Enterprises has slashed a huge price off it as it now just costs P46,500.
You could also find good deals for mobile phones at kimstore.com where some of the newly-released models are offered.
The newest phone from LG, the LG-V10 which was released last November, is up for sale there at P39,500.
Kimstore.com also has a discounted price for its Samsung Galaxy S6 Edge Plus at P31,500 instead of the P33,000.
Lenses, on the other hand, are one of the main staples should you decide to give presents for your photo hobbyists friends or loved ones.
Thus, at kimstore.com they have a discounted price for the Nikon AF-S 85mm F1.8G at P19,500 instead of P22,500.
For those who got adventure-seeking friends, onestopshopmarket.com offers a sweet deal on its GoPro Hero 4 Black as it has a discounted price at P25,490 instead of P30,000.
For those looking for a cheap yet high quality tablet, you can find one at goods.ph where you could purchase the Acer B1A71 7 inch for P5,304.
But if you are really looking for something that comes with a heftier price but undoubtedly one of the best quality tablets, goods.ph has an Apple iPad Mini 2 with a 128-gigabyte internal memory for P23,500.
But all your gadgets won2019t be of good use if it runs low on battery.

That is why, you could get a Romoss Sense 6 20000 with a huge discount at lazada.com.ph.
Instead of paying P4,399, you can now get it for only P950.
Gadgets may become more expensive at malls and going there during the Holiday rush just compounds the woes for buyers.
But when shopping online, all you need to do is scroll through the online stores, fill in basic details like your name and address, choose a purchasing method whether it would be through credit or debit card or cash and wait within a week for your package to arrive.
So just sit back, relax and shop at the comfort of your homes when you2019re looking for the next gadget that you2019ll purchase for your friends and loved ones this Yuletide Season.
Shopping frenzy , Shopping frenzy Rhealyn C.
Pojas, IT JOLTS in your veins again, that impulse to shop for Christmas in the last minute as there are things you cannot put off later yet as of now.
So here are few things those busybodies like you should consider first before you dived into the avalanche of shoppers.
Avoid risks.
You can expect long lines of carts at the counter for the holiday season.
So you better get the right items at one time and make sure that you won2019t miss out a thing and grunt for having to fall in line again after paying your bills at the counter and realizing that you forgot an important item.

To make this possible, it would be best to prepare a list of what you want and need for this holiday be it grocery items for the Noche Buena or a gift for your beloved.
It will also help you saved time since you could just directly pick up items from the corner where those products are displayed instead of pushing your carts hither and thither by trying to figure out or decide in the actual moment on what particular items to buy.

Budget constraint shopping
Before you run the risk of draining your wallet for shopping Christmas items and welcome New Year with an empty pocket, you should at least make a proportionate budget for Christmas and New Year to make sure that both celebrations are fun and memorable.

Avoid the trap of spending over budget.
Chances are, your eyes will be enticed with a lot of product displays at your favorite store as you push your shopping carts through the alleyway.
Resist the urge to pick up items that are not on your shopping list.

Plan your Trip to the Mall or Store
You can enjoy your shopping experience more if you hit the mall or store at the right time.
For smoother shopping experience, one can visit the mall early in the morning or late in the evening to avoid peak shopping hours where people usually flocked.
It is better yet if you choose a store where the mainstream shoppers do not usually go like in any downtown shopping area that also exactly provides a variety of items that you need.
So when you got all that you need, you can now have a pleasant day a head and a momentous celebration with your loved ones.
  
Merry Christmas! 
Intensifying market presence , Intensifying market presence Nelson C.
Bagaforo, WITH the construction of the P3.2 billion Aeon Towers in full swing, now moving on to the fourth to sixth level of Davao City's iconic landmark, its marketing and sales force has embarked on a series of promotional activities to further boost its sales.
With more than 70 percent of the 473 residential units comprising the mixed-use edifice already sold out, this did not stop its management to continue to strengthen its presence in the market.
"It makes us a lot easier now  because of the visibility of the building.
Before kase our prospective buyers  ang daming tanong.
Hindi pa nila alam yong process nong construction ng ganito kalaking building, ganito ka-hightech na building so hindi nila naintindihan yong foundation process, the construction process and then di nila alam na meron palang ganung four-level basement.
Kaya nung nakita nila na visible na yong building, ang daming nagsasabi na totoo pala ito.
Ongoing na pala talaga yong Aeon," said El Don dela Pe\xf1a, marketing manager of Aeon Towers, located on JP Laurel ave, in Bajada and being developed by homegrown FTC Group of Companies.
To further promote the development project and boost their sales revenues, dela Pe\xf1a said they have hired and trained sales force to exclusively market Aeon Towers in other key areas in the country where the market is very promising.
"We have assigned exclusive agents now selling Aeon Towers in key cities, like in Metro Manila and Cebu.
The fact that most of our buyers are out of town investors," he said.
"Out of town investors for Aeon Towers comprise 70 to 80 percent of our buyers.
And these are actual buyers with reservation, with payments.
Lahat with signed contracts," dela Pe\xf1a added.
To make the project more attractive to buyer-investors, he said they have assigned three levels of the building exclusively for interested investors.
  
"So they purchase a unit not for their own use, but for rent or anything like that, So ang nangyari ngayon is gumawa kami ng tatlong floors intended for that program," dela Pe\xf1a said.
"For investors we have assigned 15th to 17th floors of the condo tower for investors, purely for investors.
So meaning, it's up for rent, and it's for residential lang and it could not be converted into like an office space.
It will be managed by our own property management group," he said.
By end of this year, Aeon Tower's six-level Podium is targeted to be completed, after which the start of the massive construction of a four-star hotel that will be housed from seventh to 11th levels.
By end of the first quarter next year, construction of residential units from 12th to 32nd level will also start.

"By end of next year, the management wants to reach the top of the building," dela Pe\xf1a said.
"If there are delays that will come our way, it won't reach one year.
So we expect the turnover of units to buyers by early 2017," dela Pe\xf1a said, adding that they are still following the design of the project as originally planned.
"The design is fixed.
Me konting changes lang dun sa Podium don saharap, yon lang yong nabago talaga," he assured.
"It it's still a 33-level tower.
Still we have that skydive on top and lahat na ka smart home na.
Ang maganda ngayon is we have enhanced the interiors of each unit," he said.
Of dishes and yuletide season , Of dishes and yuletide season Karina V.
Canedo, FILIPINOS are again ectactic, as they usher in the yuletide season, what with the colorful displays of lights that adorn the malls, the parks, and the houses.
But, as they say, Filipinos go frenzy shopping for gifts, but never to miss buying food items to be shared by family and friends at the stroke of 12 midnight.

To spice up noche buena, there are a lot of food choices that are delicious yet pocket-friendly, from roasted chicken, to pork lechon, to crispy pata , and to patatim, a popular braised pork leg dish similar to paksiw na pata without the vinegar.
If you wish, you can also prepare chicken or pork barbeque.
But, of course, what noche buena is complete without ham and quezo de bola? Various brands of these products are already available in grocery stores.
If chicken is what you and your family's palate craves for, you can prepare Rellenong Manok or Stuffed deboned chicken, which is an all-time Filipino favorite.
A kilo of chicken costs around P120, based on the latest market watch.
For other chicken recipe ideas, you can go check the internet.
For dessert, you may add a personal touch or perhaps reinvent traditional favorites like Buko salad, Macaroni salad, Spaghetti, Leche flan, Mango float, Fruit salad, each can be enjoyed by the whole family at an affordable price.
In the local malls, you can find value packages for ingredients of spaghetti and macaroni.
If you also want a non-pork or chicken dishes, you may opt for sweet and sour tilapia fish, or Rellenong Bangus or , dishes that you can pull off in no time.
If simple and easy cooking is your thing, you can also just simply grill tuna 201cpanga201d  or other seafoods such as squid.
Opting to eat healthy food during Christmas dinner is also possible and attainable, according to Executive Sous Chef of Marco Polo, Alex Destriza.
201cYou can celebrate Christmas day with healthy food..you may cook chicken embutido stuffed with dried fruits, carrots, or peas, or  Lumpiang Gulay with lots of vegetables, and sprouts in white lumpia sauce, or adobo version of vegetables with tofu and lots of green beans and vegetables,201d Destriza said.
For sweets, he suggested that you can make mango float with 70% fresh mango or for a fruit salad, you can substitute mayonnaise with fresh orange juice.
To replace soft drinks, Destriza said that you can also try fresh fruit version of puree or blended, or calamansi or lemon base juices.
There are ways to enjoy Christmas, be it simple or extravagant.
A plate you share and a glass of drink you share is what makes Christmas no less than worth remembering.
Win big prizes in HB1's "Wish Upon A Gadget" , Win big prizes in HB1's "Wish Upon A Gadget" Karlo Paolo R.
Pates, WHILE it is the season of giving, NCCC HB1 Pharmacy is encouraging its loyal customers to participate with the "Wish Upon a Gadget" raffle promo for a chance to fulfill their techie wishes and win hi-tech prizes.
The promo, according HB1, was launched in partnership with United Laboratories, Inc.
 as a way of thanking their loyal shoppers for their support for the previous years here.

At stake for the grand prize is a brand new 13-inches Mac Book Pro.
A Samsung 48" LED TV with 5.1 Home Theater System and a Go Pro Hero 4 are also raffled as the second and third prizes, respectively.
There will also be 10 winners of consolation prizes of Coop Idea Gummy powerbank with 9000mAh battery power.
The "Wish Upon a Gadget" promo of HB1 was opened last October 19 and deadline of the entries is on December 31.
To qualify, a HB1 shopper can claim one raffle coupon for a purchase of P150 worth of any Unilab non-prescription products at any HB1 branch.
Raffle draw is set on January 15, 2016 at the NCCC main office.
The raffle promo targets their loyal customers of Unilab products particularly on vitamins and multivitamins such as Ceelin, Enervon, Tiki-tiki, Biogesic, Neozep, and etc.
"This our way of giving back to our customers, especially those who frequently buy their Unilab maintainance medicines and vitamins at HB1," HB1 said in a statement.

Love is the best gift, Love is the best giftKarlo Paolo R.
Pates, WE ALL know that Christmas is a time for giving and receiving, a time where people are  exchanging "I love you" with their loved ones.

It is the favorite time of year that magical stories about Santa Claus are being shared and Filipino Christmas traditions such as noche buena, caroling, Christmas trees, and gift-giving.
Kids everywhere have started filling up their Christmas cards of their holiday wish-list while their parents have also begun to think of which among those gifts written on the wish-list are set to be granted.
Common gifts wished by grade schoolers during Christmas are toys varying from different styles such as cars, action figures, LEGO sets for boys, while barbie dolls, and playhouse for girls.
But for five-year-old Veblen "Not-not" P.
Salvador Jr., he wishes to spend the Christmas celebration with his father, Veblen Salvador who is presently working in Singapore.
Aside from his wish of receiving LEGO toys this Christmas, Not-not also wanted to spend celebrations like Christmas and New Year as a family.

"Ginamingaw siya .
Nagawish na siya na dito nalang sana magawork Papa kasi pag family always together man daw dapat," Notnot's mother Dyna Pates-Salvador told Sun.Star Davao in a Facebook chat Thursday morning.

A good suggestion for parents who want more meaningful gifts for their kids is giving custom-made gifts.
Stitching their names on their bags, handkerchieves, t-shits, among others is great in adding a personal touch so that at an earlier stage, their kids would realize that the effort should be much more appreciated than monetary value.

In technology driven society, some kids would also prefer gadgets including android phones, playstation portable, and tablet computers all for gaming purposes.
But not all kids would want expensive toys for gifts.
For some kids, they prefer more non-toy gifts that would lead them to enriching family experiences, learning, and valuable family time.
Parents may be busy with their job or other sorts of earning a living.
But during the Yuletide Season the best gift that they could give to their children is togetherness.

A season of giving at Matina Enclaves, A season of giving at Matina EnclavesCONDOMINIUM finders are in for a big surprise this Yuletide season with huge discounts and exciting offers from The Enclaves Residences at Matina Enclaves.
The Enclaves Residences is the mixed use development project of local developer Escandor Development Corporation .
Building 3, which was recently launched is now open for sale and is being offered for huge discounts on all of its units.

On top of the discounts, buyers are also treated to home freebies like furniture and appliances.
For their third building Esdevco has expanded their market for their 2 bedroom buyers by introducing new and affordable 45 square meter units without compromising the quality of their units.
Since its launching, Building 3 has reached sales amounting to 15% of its total inventory.
Patronage of the Enclaves Residences has always been notably high because of the 201cvalue for money201d that it offers in its developments and it is also to be noted that this comes in a reasonable price.
They will also have a meet and greet 'Santa open house on Dec 11.
The first Enclaves Residence building is scheduled for top-off on early months of 2016 and its projected turnover on the fourth quarter of 2017; the second building is scheduled for piling by end of 2015 and projected turnover on third quarter of 2017; for the third building, piling will begin by mid-2016 and projected turnover on mid 2018.
The Enclaves Residences is a part of the three residential options to choose from at Matina Enclaves they also have the Plains which is an open lot development and the Courtyard composed of house and lot units.

Other than its living spaces, Matina Enclaves is also a great community that is packed with amenities that future residents will surely love: a two-storey clubhouse called CAME  that features a gym, kids' playroom, function/ meeting room and function hall that can accommodate up to 150 persons.

It is not every day that we can find home investments that offer both quality and affordability, so why not invest to a gift of home for yourself and your loved ones this season of giving? 
Best gifts for Christmas , Best gifts for Christmas Kriztja Marae G.
Labrador, A FEW more weeks to go 2018til Christmas, still having second thoughts on what gifts to give your family, significant other and besties?
Let2019s admit it that even if we tried to some planning, most of us would still end up joining the holiday rush when shopping for gifts.
Here are some 201cunderrated201d or 201cforgotten201d gift ideas to give to your loved ones during the season of gift-giving.
The gift of TIME
It may sound as clich\xe9 but time is really gold and spending it with someone or with a group of friends is a precious gift.
Sharing some afternoon tea, chatting about random stuff and just taking time to reconnect with one another away from the usual hectic day-to-day schedules.
The holidays are indeed the perfect time for that.
The gift of ADVENTURE
Can be as simple as strolling at the Roxas night market here or going for a one day adventure on various amenities such as sky cycling at Eden Nature Park and Resort.
There are multiple options to save on this one.
Creating new memories is one of the best gifts that we tend to forget.

The gift of REMEMBERING
A handwritten card, goodie basket, a mix tape or Spotify playlist, things that can put a smile or bring back happy moments that you have shared with them, all of these are just another gift idea that we resort to.
So why not scan your old photo albums or remember things that your mom or besties used to love or be obsessed with and share some flashback moments with them.
Nowadays, we often use price tags as the basis of gift-giving but let us not forget that more than the price tag, it will always be the thought and the love in what we give that matters because the best things in life will always be the simple ones and it is often free.
Celebrate Christmas the Filipino way , Celebrate Christmas the Filipino way Christine Joice C.
Cudis, IF A global competition which country has the most felt Christmas celebration was to be held, Philippines would have a good shot at winning.
Various international magazines and newspapers have already featured a story about the Philippines for having the World's longest celebration of Christmas.
Majority of Filipinos start their preparation for the Christmas season as soon as the calendar hit the first ber-month or September.
Lavish decorations of Christmas trees and parols, Christmas light displays, as well as eucharictic celebrations usually extends until to the feast of the three kings which usually falls over early January.
A good reason behind this long of a festivity roots from the people's faith.
Being among the most populous nations in Asia, Philippines is known as a Christian nation.

Several traditions were handed down or even continued until today.

Among those are the following:
Simbang Gabi
The Christmas season is never complete with the "Simbang Gabi" or the early dawn masses.
It is a series of masses held for nine nights culminating on the eve of the 24th.
Most people believe that a person's wish would be granted if he or she completes all nine Simbang Gabi masses.
This practice is uniquely Filipino.
Noche Buena
Noche Buena or the fiesta celebration on Christmas eve is a tradition where families meet to dine together on eve of the 24th.

Christmas Lantern
In some parts of the world, people are experiencing the magical White Christmas but in a tropical country like ours, parols gives colors the households during the yuletide season.
It is the symbol of the star that the Three Kings followed that brought them to the town of Bethlehem on the night of the birth of Christ.

Quality service at Bebe's salon , Quality service at Bebe's salon Christine Joice C.
Cudis, THIS newly-opened beauty salon at the heart of Davao City entices fashion and wellness enthusiasts as it offers all in one salon services.
Aside from the quality service that Bebe Beauty Salon offers, they also try to attract their customers of their display of renowned bags, eyewear, shoes, and clothing imported from United Kingdom, United States, and Europe.
Owner and manager Emy Fernandez said she collected the best items from top-notch stores such as Victoria's Secret, Prada, Chanel, and among others fresh from her recent trips abroad.
Located at the 2nd floor Door 22 Beechnut Building, Sta.
Avenue, Bebe Beauty Salon also offers accessible spot for customers who are always on the go.
It is the perfect hub for clients who prefers for a quiet place.
The salon aims not only to provide the best and affordable services from foot spa to Brazilian waxing but to make sure that their customers also gets the feeling of satisfaction of their service.
201cI will make sure this store will be a sanctuary for those who needed a relaxing time for themselves,201d Fernandez said.

Crystal chandeliers hanged from the ceiling and the walls provides homey kind of experience.
After being prepped up by their resident stylists, beauty products can also be purcharsed from their Beauty Bar near the entrance of the salon.
The Bebe Beauty Salon opens 24 hours a day and seven days a week to cater the needs of all their clients.

Building credibility over the years , Building credibility over the years Ace June Rell S.
Perez, WITH the GH Office Depot retail being the leading retail store of school and office supplies for five decades already, expanding the company's network as well as their products and services are now their priority and focus.
Regarded as 201cAll-in-one store201d, GH Office Depot, is not only limited on selling school and office supplies but they have also ventured out on home and office furnitures, hardware products, electronics, household items, Christmas decors, and production services.
201cMore and more people are starting to know and visit our store because not only they can get their school and office supplies at affordable price.
They also love the quality of the products we offer.
We have gained the confidence and patronage of our clients because we provided them with the best products among all brands,201d GH Office Depot manager Paul Go said.
Featured brands at the store are 3M, Scotch, Kimberly-Clark Professional, Rubbermaid Commercial products, Panasonic, Copyright, Innovation, Crayola, Faber Castell, Dong-A, and T-Pencil, among others.
201cThe company keeps on updating and upgrading its list of items to cope up with the current trend in the market, serving our clients with the latest and most up-to-date products,201d Go said, adding that the company's credibility has been their edge against the competitors.
GH Office Depot is now gearing up for an expansion of a new branch in Diversion Road, Davao City.
201cMaybe three years from now we will put up the second branch, it will be bigger compared to our main store but definitely we will offer the same items,201d Go said.
GH Office Depot is now located along 88-88A Monteverde Avenue in Davao City.
Christmas Food Expo opens Friday, Christmas Food Expo opens FridayAce June Rell S.
Perez, IN UNITY to promote the City2019s food industry, Davao artisans and gourmands is expected to showcase their delicious treats in a Christmas-themed market feels in the Davao Gourmet Collective- Festive Food Holiday Market  2015 that opens today and will end on Sunday at the SM Lanang Premier.
Carmina M.
Del Rosario, event's lead organizer, told reporters in a recent media forum that this year's DGC-FFHM brings a whole new food experience to Dabawenyos.
"This holiday season, we bring you another exciting and different kind of food experience here," Del Rosario said.
A total of 13 participating exhibitors are entered in this year's event including Sugarcane Bar, Osvaldo's Cakes, Sea Green Caf\xe9, Saging Repablik, Stellina2019s Lemonade, Kai2019s Artisan Chocolates, La Bodeguita, The Crazy Cook, Casa Ensaimada, Dizon Cured Meat, JR Pastry, Baby Cakes and Caf\xe9 El Gato.

"The market is very ready.
With the influx of progress, Dabawenyos are very hungry for new things, thus the staging of this festival," she added.
The DGC-FFHM market hours is scheduled from 11 a.m.
to 8 p.m.
"Shoppers and mall-goers can feast on a flavorful variety of holiday selections and explore and get a taste of wide range of food options and must-haves this Christmas season," Del Rosario said.
All exhibitors were screened by the organizers to only showcase the best delicious, unique and innovative menu.

Del Rosario said they have prioritized new businesses and budding entrepreneurs for this year's event.
201cWe are looking forward for the success of this event and we are positive that we can stage this again in the coming years,201d Del Rosario said.

CBTL: Coffee, brush and 2016 journal , CBTL: Coffee, brush and 2016 journal Antonio L.
Colina IV, "I choose to grow each day
To be purposeful at work and play
And throughout life's highs and lows
I choose a life that overflows
Someday I'll look back
At my well-travelled track
I'll beam because my heart knows
I chose a life that overflows."
IT HAS always been a nice feeling to sit down and muddle through the memories of 2015, both the good and the bad.

This is best done in the morning when you have a cup of coffee by your side, allowing its aroma to tickle your senses while taking in the sun's warmth as it kisses your skin.
This will bring you to another realm where there is only you and peace.
Now, you look back at what 2015 has been.
Some would say it's smooth-sailing while others would claim that life throws lemons at them.
First, call to mind the difficulties.
You take the first sip as the first life's blow comes into mind.
That hurts but you laugh at it now because you know you have emerged victorious in the end.
Then, you open your journal, grab your pen, and write what you are most thankful for after having experienced those hurts.
You let go and choose to enjoy the life's zest anew.
It is cathartic as always to write down the life's highs and lows.
You celebrate life when you are feeling good and in the same way that you surrender to yourself when everything seems to be falling apart.
When life happens, you simply let go.
The Coffee Bean and Tea Leaf  launched recently its artsy 2016 journals that keep track of your experiences, regardless if the best or the worst.
This would bring out the artist in you, as each is themed with watercolor designs that inspire you to live each day of your life to the fullest.
As you flip the page to the new month, it welcomes you with words, words that are simple yet bear not only powerful meaning but also give you a reassuring and warm feeling that reminds of your greatness and potential.
As we start the run-up to 2016, be ready with your visions -- build a life the way you design it to be.
The word for January is create.
Create a to-do list, create new hobbies - is it writing, painting, or travelling? 
Whatever it may be, be free-spirited and be the beautiful soul that you already are.

Filipino's poor childhood inspires 500K-light Christmas show, Filipino's poor childhood inspires 500K-light Christmas show
RIZAL.
In this Sunday, Nov.
29, 2015 photo, visitors walk around the compound of house lit by thousands of Christmas lights in Cainta, Rizal province, east of Manila, Philippines.

CAINTA, Rizal -- As a child from a poor family, Alexander Cruz marveled at the big houses adorned with Christmas lights near his Philippine neighborhood, but the gates were always closed.
Now a successful businessman with a huge house in a hilly town south of Manila, Cruz celebrates Christmas in even more spectacular style.
About half a million colorful lights cover every inch of his home: the roof, ceiling, walls, fence, doors, canopies, windows and even the trees.
And he and his wife open the gates to everyone.
"We're doing this to share our blessings, to give or share the spirit of Christmas to the people who visited our place," the 55-year-old Cruz said in an interview.
His home in Cainta has dazzled people far beyond the quiet town of around 290,000 people.
TV networks have documented his holiday wonderland, which has become the backdrop for countless selfies and sees up to 1,000 visitors per day.
"It brings back childhood feelings of Christmas, like in the movies, that you see big houses with big lights," said Ella Cosme, a 34-year-old software programmer.
"You feel like a child."
The lighting is designed by Cruz's wife, Aida, and preparations for the display start as early as August.
Alexander Cruz estimated that they used 5,000 boxes of LED lights, with each box containing a hundred bulbs.
The Christmas lighting extravaganza is crowned by four brightly lit Christmas trees atop the roof.
Inside the house and within its gardens are Nativity scenes, a centerpiece in many homes in the Philippines.
The country is a bastion of Christianity in Asia, and many Filipinos prepare for Christmas by going to Mass before dawn every day for nine days before December 25.
The Cruzes have gone all-out for Christmas for the past five years.
Alexander Cruz said this year might be the last, since his neighbors are inconvenienced by the crowds.
But with many residents and visitors urging him to carry on the tradition, he said he may reconsider.
"We're embarrassed that the subdivision is losing its privacy because of the number of people coming to see the house," Cruz said, but he added some of his neighbors may have gotten used to the upbeat holiday crowds that reach 500-1,000 people daily on weekends.
"They were the ones who said not to stop it, especially our mayor, who said there has been a good effect," Cruz said.
"At least there is good news in Cainta." 
Faith and a fighting spirit   , Faith and a fighting spirit   Ivy C.
Tejano, "NEVER doubt yourself.
Be optimistic." It2019s easier said than done, but nothing2019s difficult for Teofanes Entes Jr.
who has been a guide and a porter of the Mount Apo for 11 years now.
 
Entes said to be a mountain guide and a porter needs faith in oneself, one2019s abilities, and experience to validate that belief.
It is faith within that will shape one's performance and progression in life, he added.
 
"Mao na akong nakuha sa pila ka tuig nako sinaka kanaog anang Apo.
O, naanad nami binaklayay, pero dili lalim magsaka-kanaog sa Apo ah 2014 naa kay karga ng gamit, lisod na dalan, unya tugnaw pa jud -2014 fighting spirit lang ," Entes said.
 
Entes said as a guide and a porter, one must disabuse oneself of personal illusions about the climb.
Their work is not just about climbing the hard trails.
It is more about the clients.
He said keeping his clients safe and ensuring that the experiences he shared with them have the right blend of challenge and pleasure, is the most fulfilling thing to do.
 
"Bisan pa naa mga panahon na matunong ka imong ginaubanan, di ka kasabot sa ila ginapanulti, pero magkasinabot gihapon unya safe and happy sila, fulfillment na sa ako na.
Lingaw, lingaw makahimamat ug lain-laing tao ," Entes said.
 
That is the reason why he exerts extra effort to serve each and every client well, knowing full well that climbs are seasonal and so is work.
 The 31-year-old guide and porter is a farmer in Barangay Kapatagan, Digos City.
He said being motivated and positive all the time helps him keep going not just in climbing the mountain but also in surviving life.
 
"Kailangan kabalo ka unsa imong gusto sa kinabuhi para didto ka mag-focus.
Ako, kontento na kaayo ko sa kinabuhi2026 kauban akong pamilya, malipayon mi na nia mi diri sa bukid nagpuyo ," Entes said.
 
He said he is already blessed, and he wants to nurture what he has in life as a guide, a porter, a farmer and a family man.

Lights shine brightest in Tangub City this Christmas, Lights shine brightest in Tangub City this Christmas
Finnish National Theatre in Finland and Disneyland Paris 
Riain Alfonso, OUR country has been known to welcome Christmas as early as September where malls and households start putting up the decors that signal the yuletide season.

Thus, many of our cities and provinces have also become tourist destinations where domestic and foreign tourists enjoy watching various Christmas festivals around the country.

In Northern Mindanao, we can boast of the brightest Christmas festival in the Philippines 
Tangub City in Misamis Occidental lights up its Christmas Symbols Festival.
The longest-running festival here in the country now on its 23rd year that starts every 1st of December until the 8th of January in 2016.

This year2019s festival is even more special as the city prepares for the 25th year of the Christmas Symbols Festival and the 50th anniversary of Tangub2019s cityhood in 2017.
Sixteen entries from private and public agencies, school divisions, and hospitals have been put up.
These huge structures depict various sites from around the world.
This year2019s theme of "Tangub City Celebrates Christmas Around the World" has been the theme for the past four years in a row.
 
201cThis is our 23rd edition and we started in 1992.
We want to promote Tangub City through this festival.
We also want to showcase the ingenuity and the creativity of Tangubanons,201d said Vice Mayor Edemar Alota.
 
201cAlso, the LGU wants to give back to the taxpayers what are due to them, so isa ito sa maibibigay namin sa kanila, yung Christmas.
Kasi, hindi na man lahat ng mga Tangubanons, lalong-lalo na yung mga nasa barangay, may ilaw, may Christmas lights.
 So, dito sa plaza, libre.201d
He furthered, 201cAnd, lastly, we want to give back to God for the blessings He gives to us Tangubanons.
We are celebrating the birth of Jesus Christ with colors, with glitters, at the same time with meaning.201d
Tangubanons and tourists alike flocked to the city plaza for the official lighting ceremony graced by Mar Roxas, the former Interior Secretary and Liberal Party2019s standard-bearer for the 2016 Presidential elections, and local government officials like First District Representative Jorge Almonte, Second District Representative Henry Oaminal, Governor Herminia "Hermie" Ramiro, Vice-governor Gigi Almonte, and Tangub Mayor Philip Tan with his wife, Dr.
Jennifer Wee Tan, also former Tangub mayor and current City Tourism Council chairperson.

The elbow-to-elbow crowd loudly cheered during the much awaited fireworks display that lasted for almost 10 minutes.
The grandiose fireworks show served as the 2018front act2019 for the night2019s climax which was the lighting up of the sixteen entrees.
 
Despite the difficulty in 2018traveling2019 from one structure to the next due to the huge crowd, everybody still had big smiles on their faces.
One can visit all sixteen sites as long as they have their 2018passport,2019 available at the City Tourism Office, with them.

Spectators were amazed by how accurately depicted and colorfully and creatively are the entries made.
The sites featured the Titanic Belfast Museum in Northern Ireland, Katara Towers in Qatar, Ranipokhari in Nepal, Finnish National Theatre in Finland, Azadi Tower in Iran, Temple of Julius Caesar in Italy, the National Folk Museum of Korea, the Hollywood Sign in USA, and Disneyland in Paris to name a few.
 
As you go visit each of the sites, one gets to actually feel what it might be like to be in the actual buildings they were designed from.
Some of the entries go up to three or four stories high and you can even climb to the very top of the tower at Disneyland and get a bird2019s eye view of the entire plaza.
 
It2019s quite obvious that there was a lot of hardwork and creativity in play during the construction of the fa\xe7ade of the entries.
The walls are either made of bamboo or shells, flowers crafted from dextrose bottles, Christmas trees made of empty soda bottles or cut outs of plastic cups, and Christmas lights strewn all over the place; in every corner of the entries, spectators are sure to see something unique and inspiring.

One incredible entry even had huge multi-headed snakes crafted from 201ckinhason201d or shells.
All sixteen entries are works of art and were without a doubt created with the passion for Christmas that all Tangubanons are known for.
 
 201cThis is the best way to celebrate Christmas in the whole country,201d said Department of Tourism Region 10 Catalino Chan III.
 
201cTangub is a small city but it has a big heart.
This is a celebration of education, culture, and of peace.201d  Chan added that the people get to know more about other countries and of other people2019s culture through the festival.
 
The entries will go through three rounds of judging and are judged based on creativity and interpretation, quality of workmanship, artistic combination of lights, and overall appeal.
Flightradar24: Your own plane stalking tool, Flightradar24: Your own plane stalking toolRoark L.
Masbad, Wacky Tech, IF YOU'RE an aviation geek, this one's a must-have.
Well, even if you're not that kind of a geek, it's still a good-to-have-in-my-device kind of app.
And don't just get the free version.
You have got to get the pro version.

What is it you ask? It's an app to help you keep track of flights of pretty every civilian aircraft out there.
Of course, it will need certain bits of information to be able to display things for you.
Check out their website at https://www.flightradar24.com/ to know more how things work in the background.
But this is how it looks when I launch the app.
It will default to your current location.
You'll see a search bar at the top; the location button at the bottom and a couple of other buttons.

If you know a friend's flight number, just go ahead do a quick search on the search bar.
Once you have the search result, tap on it and there it is.
It's a really handy app to keep track of flights and find out where it is exactly along its flight path.
It will also tell you the approximate arrival time at the destination airport.
This will come in handy especially these days when our domestic flights are riddled with so much delays.
The pro version  can show you a more specific or close to specific plane icon.
It shows the plane's profile at least.
Small icons for smaller aircrafts and vice versa.

Here's an example.
Notice the differences in those icons? Cool, eh? 
Moving on.
Each plane will have specific information about it: origin, destination, speed, altitude, aircraft model, a sample photo of that specific model for that specific airline, etc.

Check this out.
I tapped on one of the plane icons to highlight it and I instantly get a small pop-up at the bottom of my screen giving me the essentials.
A quick look and I know right away that the airline is Cathay Pacific.
The flight number is CX198 that departed Auckland and is heading to Hong Kong.
It's also due to arrive in about an hour and a half.
And of course, the aircraft is a Boeing 777-367.
If you're someone who's going to fetch someone at the airport, knowing the approximate arrival time will be invaluable.
No more wasted time standing around the airport parking lot.
Well, unless, that's your thing.
Anyway, if you're hungry for more detail, tap on the middle icon with the double chevron .
The next screen will look like this one:
Pretty nifty, yeah? I think so too.

Those numbers are all updated live! It's every aviation geek's wet dreams.
Okay, I might be exaggerating a bit there.
But, it still is cool beans! 
I use this app a lot when I travel.
It's my way of checking and knowing ahead of all the other passengers if our flight will be delayed or not.
You can check airport schedules too.
Didn't I mention that already? No? Oopsies! My bad.

Yes, you can do that.
Just search for the name of the airport you have in mind, tap and it's there.
I selected here NAIA.
To know what flights are arriving, tap on the plane icon pointed downard.
Departures would be the icon pointing upward.
Pretty straightforward.
Kid-friendly if you as me.

And finally, best cool feature for this app, go tap on that binocular icon right beside the search bar at the top.
What happens? I'll let you be the one to discover that.

Happy plane stalking! 
Datu's Tribe rocks for Davao's Lumads, Datu's Tribe rocks for Davao's Lumads
Photo by Pol Torrente
Tyrone Velez, IT HAS been 19 years since the rock band Datu's Tribe last performed in Davao City.
Their return to Davao on November 28 at the Metro Station for The Kapit-Bisig Benefit Concert for the Lumad evacuees showed they still have their rage and roll.
Their gig stirred the young audience to frenzy right from their opening song "Feelings" to their 90s hits "And I See", "Nakakalitong mga Tao" and "Sarsa Platoon".
 They did moshpit on stage, flashed cellphones and sang along to the lyrics, to think that most songs came out when they were still in their diapers.
At times frontman Eric 'Cabring' Cabrera would pass the mic to them to finish a line and a yell.
"Galing! Pwede na akong mo-retiro!" he jokingly growled after hearing the boys belt out their songs.
But retiring is far from what this band has in mind.
Returning in 2005 after a hiatus, Datu's Tribe reformed with new bandmates - guitarist Moel Diaz, bassist Andre Umali and drummer Paolo Manuel -and with new causes to champion, while finding old and new followers along the way.
"There's a big crossover mystique for this band," said Cabring in an interview.
"On one hand we're very close to progressive groups.
On the other hand we had links to rock bands and the young ones who want to learn more.
We found that our reputation was intact, and slowly we regained that status."
Datu's Tribe is lending their presence to cause-oriented events, such as in the campaign to save OFW Mary Jane Veloso from execution in Indonesia.
 This Davao concert was organized by the All Workers' Union to support the Lumad evacuees in Haran.
The band took time to visit the Lumads in Haran before and after their concert.
On Sunday, Cabring spent a reading session with Lumad students, reliving his other profession as a teacher.
While guitarist Dr.
Moel Diaz, was joined by his wife who happens to be a nurse in a medical mission.
"To finally meet the Lumads, the real Datus, who were the inspiration of our band's name, to hear them talk of their plight in their own words, I think it is us who should be grateful to meet them," said Cabring.
The band's name is an interesting trivia.
After arguing what they should name their band, they settled to put their suggestions in an ash-tray.
"My choice was picked.
Were they pissed," Cabring smiled.
He said he thought of the name because of the mysticism and history of Datus in the country.
 
Hearing the Lumads' stories deepened the band's concern for them.
"I am incensed especially to hear the abuses against children, being a teacher and a father.
It's a burden to seem their being marginalized.
Who benefits from mining their lands, from exploiting them?" he added.
That Datu's Tribe became a politically-charged band was not by design.
"It wasn't intentional.
I wasn't even an activist.
But a large part of that was the experience growing up and studying in UP Los Banos and UP Diliman.
Then as a teacher in UP Integrated, I hear stories from my students, about their problems and about their parents.
And I couldn't pen love songs, so I write about these things."
He said the still marvelled how they were part of the 1990s wave of Pinoy rock bands that studio labels dug into.
"The 90s was a gold mine in music.
You have E-heads, and even Yano, and  milked us.
They didn't care what your songs are about.
 Universal wanted an alternative act to compete with other studios, so thank you," Cabring laughs remembering this.
As grizzled as he has been to see the music industry squeeze talents for profits, Cabring still believes artists old and new can still be instruments of change.
"No one's gonna laugh.
It's the solidarity that counts.
We don't have to discriminate.
Not everybody can be like us or be like The Jerks.
But In your own way as an artist, much more can be done if you are aware the problems, aware of the roots of this, and you're willing to join in this struggle to change the system.
You will be effective to spread your message to your mass base.
They see you working on this on the side, then that can serve to inspire.
It's that spark that makes people think.
You encourage them to think."  
Cabring promised that their support for the Lumads will continue.
He said a video documentary is in the works.
"We want to show we're not just these rockstars.
But we can be people who can express our support and inspire people to do something."
Pinoy in Rome: Countdown to the Jubilee Year of Mercy, Pinoy in Rome: Countdown to the Jubilee Year of Mercy
Sant'Andrea main altar - Saint Andrew's Passion
Robert Z.
Cortes, This is part 1 of the 6-part series of articles documenting the author's experiences as he prepares to welcome the Jubilee Year of Mercy in Rome.
Follow his trip and learn from his experiences right here on Sun.Star.
, THE Extraordinary Jubilee of Mercy announced by Pope Francis around Holy Week this year is finally starting on December 8, the Solemnity of the Immaculate Conception, just a couple of days from now.
That this special event in the Church's history begins on that date is, of course, no accident.
This Pope's devotion to Mary, shown publicly every time he passes by St.
Mary Major before any major trip abroad, should have made that choice almost predictable.
However, aside from human choices, one ought to consider above all the guidance of Providence, whose will it is that the most important events in the Church happen under the mantle of Mary, Mother of the Church and Mother of Mercy.
So the idea to prepare proximately for the Jubilee Year of Mercy by making a novena to the Immaculate Conception made a lot of sense to me.
And being in Rome, the city that arguably no place in the world can match in terms of the quality and quantity of sacred art present, I took advantage to do the following.
For nine days - including the Solemnity, hence the term "novena" - I was going to visit an image of Our Lady venerated in various churches around the city.
But which churches, though?
Given the multitude of beautiful and historic churches in Rome, it seemed the best way to approach this project was simply to be led by Providence.
This approach is not "to be too mystical about it," as I learned quite recently from, of all people, a non-Catholic ethics professor in a very secular American university whom I interviewed a couple of months ago.
His defense is that "there still is another dimension in terms of a holistic being in which our reason and our spirit and our emotions are an integrated whole...
So, you listen to the voice of the spirit." This was actually good ecumenical advice to which my experience in the following days would attest.

These experiences, culled from my journal of these novena days, are actually Church history lessons devotional, tour-guiding tips, and philosophizing all rolled into one.
I share them seeing that they can serve some purpose, however one may be preparing for the Extraordinary Jubilee Year of Mercy.

Day 1: Our Lady of the Sacred Heart in Sant'Andrea della Valle
Yesterday, November 30, was the beginning of the novena to the Immaculate Conception.
It also happened to be the feast of St.
Andrew.
Now at the other end of the street where my university is happens to be a huge, looming basilica dedicated to Saint Andrew with the name "Sant'Andrea della Valle." People with very limited time in Rome usually don't have time to visit this magnificent church, but really next time you come, you should.
This church was actually built by the very same people involved in the building of St.
Peter's and used this as their "practice" church; people like Giacomo della Porta and Carlo Maderno.
The fountain in the square fronting the church is Maderno's.
The paintings and the frescoes inside are even more breathtaking.
The dome and the ceiling are one of the best there is in Rome -- and perhaps in Christendom.
Since it was the feast of St.
Andrew, precisely, I decided to do my prayer right there, before the huge fresco of the crucifixion of St.
Andrew.
I did my rosary in one of the side chapels dedicated to Our Lady of the Sacred Heart.
And by the time I left the church, which is just a five-minute walk from my house, what else could I say, but thank You.
Really there is nothing much else one can say.
Day 2: Our Lady and Child in San Salvatore in Onda
Funny what one sees when one changes perspectives.
Going home from jogging one day, I decided to pass by the right  side of Via dei Pettinari .
I happened to look up by chance and I saw this charming image of Our Lady I had never seen before, even if I'd already passed by here more than ten times.
Then, when I looked down, I likewise noticed what should have been an inconspicuous door.
Now I saw there was a paper posted on it hinting that inside was actually a church called San Salvatore in Onda and the place where Saint Vincent Pallotti's remains are venerated.
I took mental note of the opening schedule and resolved I would do the second day of my novena there.
What was behind that inconspicuous door? Actually, a small but amazingly beautiful jewel of a church.
First, behind the green door commonly seen along the street, was another set of wider doors made of beautiful, strong, old wood.
It had a huge tarp proudly claiming that St.
John Paul II had visited this church.
For such a small church, I thought, it would be surprising any pope would do that.
But of course, if one knew JP II and St.
Vincent Pallotti and what they each stood for, one would understand.
For JP II loved to promote the apostolate among lay people, and St.
Vincent, in his own 19th century, religious way was one of the promoters of the lay apostolate at the time when it was so much lacking.
He founded the "Pious Union of Catholic Apostolate." That's a union of priests, religious and laity - but the "Pallotines" as they are called, really just consists of the religious brothers and priests, and the laity are, well...
they're there.
But that was certainly a huge start.
The church is now their home base, but it wasn't so at first.
Built near the end of the 11th and beginning of the 12th century, it was given to the Franciscans from which two popes came from.
Knowing this historicity of the church and that St.
Vincent's body is now under the altar, one then understands this church deserved the Pope's visit.
But to add to these, there's also the sheer beauty of medieval and renaissance art that one sees on the ceiling and the simple baldachin under which Mass was held, when I was there.
The image of Our Lady and Child by Cesare Mariani in the main altar is also arresting.
The church has the appellation "in Onda" which means "in the wave" most probably because of the frequent flooding of the Tiber.
I've seen some of these signs on marble stone around several parts in Rome, indicating where the river was at this or that point, and there's only one thing I can say.
The worst Manila floods are as if only two inches, compared to Rome flooding in those days! I'm not sure if this has any connection to one image of Our Lady venerated there on a huge side altar, "Virgin most Powerful" - because one certainly needed a huge power to survive such inundations!
But last night, I know I was inundated by only one thing -- thanksgiving for being surrounded by such beauty and holiness.

=======
READ MORE:
PART 2:Day 3: Sant'Agnese in Agone
PART 3:Day 4: Santa Maria della Strada in the Church of Il Ges\xf9
PART 4:Day 5: Mother of Sorrows in San Carlo ai CatinariDay 6: The Presentation of Mary in Santa Maria in Monticelli
PART 5:Day 7: Holy Mary, Help of the Poor in Santissima Trinit\xe0 dei PelligriniDay 8: Our Lady of Montserrat in Santa Maria in Monserrato degli Spagnoli
PART 6:Day 9: Mother of the Church in St.
Peter's Square at the Opening Mass of the Extraordinary Jubilee Year of Mercy
Elephants get love and care in Cambodia, with tourists' help , Elephants get love and care in Cambodia, with tourists' help 
This June 2015 photo shows two of the elderly elephants that are part of the Mondulkiri Project in Mondulkiri Province in eastern Cambodia.
The Mondulkiri Project aims to act as a sanctuary for elephants that previously worked for timber companies or as attractions in the tourists hub of Siem Reap.
The project also seeks to give the local indigenous population jobs and curtail logging in the area.

SEN MORONOM, Cambodia -- The trip to the hills of eastern Cambodia had all the makings of a luxurious getaway: delicious fresh fruit fed by hand, a dip in a refreshingly cold watering hole and a relaxing massage.
But I wasn't receiving these amenities.
Elderly elephants were.
And I was one of several tourists paying for the privilege of doting on them.
At the Mondulkiri Project, it's not the people who call the shots, but the elephants.
Visitors from all over the world come here for the chance to interact with the behemoth creatures by washing them, feeding them, playing with them and, of course, getting selfies with them.
One thing that doesn't happen: riding on the animals' backs.
Named for Cambodia's most sparsely populated province, the Mondulkiri Project aims to act as a sanctuary for elephants that previously worked for timber companies or as attractions in the tourist hub of Siem Reap, home to the Angkor Wat site.
The Mondulkiri Project also seeks to give the local indigenous population, called the Bunong, opportunities for jobs and help in curtailing logging and promoting forest conservation.
The Mondulkiri Project began in 2013, founded by the Tree family, who are not members of the Bunong community but who support the Bunongs with revenue from the Mondulkiri Project.
The Tree family offers trekking along with the elephant experiences, and they run Tree Lodge, a bare-bones but comfortable set of bungalows with magnificent views of the Cambodian countryside.
During my stay, I joined several other tourists, both solo and group travelers, in cleaning and feeding the elephants.
We also got an in-depth explanation of the project, its goals and why preserving the area is important.
Then came the fun part: getting up close and personal with the gigantic mammals.
The elephants spend all their time in a protected area of the forest, with local guides watching over them.
The elephants were friendly, hungry and eager to interact with us.
For the humans, there was a lunch of rice, vegetables, meat and iced coffee.
Then an English-speaking Bunong guide led us on an easy trek through the lush jungles as we headed to a chilly watering hole to wash one of the creatures.
More photo opportunity than actual cleansing, the elephant seemed to enjoy getting his back scratched and didn't mind the picture-taking.
We all had the same post-cleansing goal anyway: a nap.

Simple home decor, maximizing space tips, Simple home decor, maximizing space tips

HOME is the most valuable asset the family can have.
It provides a sense of security.
It is also the domain where the family can express their creativity in making the home a nurturing place for every member of the family.
Check out some decoration tips you may want to apply in your own home.

Space is always a challenge, making the home looks like a jungle or a warehouse.
Ni\xf1a Borromeo, an interior designer shared some storage maximization tips.
1.
Use dishes and glassware as part of the decorating scheme.
Simple shelves can hold plates and bowls.

2.
Stash wooden spoons, laddle and other frequently-used cooking toolsin in a wide canister that can be left near the stove.

3.
Deep, wide drawers are perfect for storing pans and pots in one place.

4.
Utilize the outside surfaces, including the cabinet sides, and store things where they are readily available and easy to grab.

5.
Place less used items on top of cabinets where they are out of the way.
There is a lot of precious space that you might not be taking full advantage of.

6.
Spaces under the stairs can be used as shelves to place those glasswares that are not frequently used.

7.
Line the area right underneath the ceiling with shelves.

8.
Baskets are one of the cheaper and better-looking storage solutions.
They are ideal for storing fruits, vegetables, dish cloths or other items.

****

Pinoy in Rome: Countdown to the Jubilee Year of Mercy , Pinoy in Rome: Countdown to the Jubilee Year of Mercy 
Sant'Agnese - view from South piazza Navona
Robert Z.
Cortes, This is part 2 of the 6-part series of articles documenting the author's experiences as he prepares to welcome the Jubilee Year of Mercy in Rome.
Follow his trip and learn from his experiences right here on Sun.Star.
, Day 3: Sant'Agnese in Agone
One knows he's getting "spoiled" by Rome's beauty when he avoids Piazza Navona at all costs when he makes the seven-minute walk from Piazza Farnese  to Piazza Sant'Apollinare .
One would understand the logic of that, of course, especially in this season when this place is just so full of people at around lunch time.
But there is a beautiful church there, alas, too often missed out by the usual tourist, who is naturally fascinated by the Bernini fountain of the Quattro Fiumi  and awed by the sheer activity in the piazza .
Once one's attention is caught by these distractions, one loses track of time in the piazza and realizes only too late that there's no more time to enter the church.
It doesn't help that unlike the bigger churches in Rome, the people manning this church demand their siesta time.
By some act of providence -- most probably acting through human error -- my choir's practice ended so late yesterday.
By the time I had finished eating lunch, I looked at my watch and realized it was one of those "oh-happy-fault" moments: it was opening time for Sant'Agnese in Agone.
It was then settled that I was going to do the third day of my novena to the Immaculate Conception there.

This Baroque church is as baroque as baroque can get, just judging from the facade made by Francesco Borromini.
As one approaches the church from the southern end, however, one should turn his back a bit, so one sees an image of Our Lady known .
Now, this is one would be one of the most charming Rome can offer.
For it has a beautiful cornice over the image with the inscription "Advocata Nostra" and "ora pro nobis." The image is large as well, and was obviously placed there to "Christianize" the whole formerly pagan stadium, saying "Our advocate, pray for us!"
As one enters the Church, if one still had any doubts that this is the height of baroque, one look at the arresting ceiling and dome will settle that.
I would have to say that of the many domes I have seen in Rome, this would be the most impressive.
But all the pictures I've don't justice to it.
For that I had to turn to Aaron Articulo, one of the Philippines' most promising young photographers, who has graciously lent me this picture to share with you.
 
In any case, all the sculptures and reliefs in this church all shout "baroque!" You can see that fact on the relief of the main altar, before which I did my rosary.
It's a relief of the "double Holy Family" .
To add to the baroque-ness, baroque music was playing.
It's not very easy to pray with that, however -- at least for me.
So when it was about time to do mental prayer, I decided to enter a small chapel where I knew a treasure is kept.
That treasure is the skull of St.
Agnes, which one sees enshrined in a beautiful metal sculpture ordered made by St.
Pius X.
I was very lucky, because for a long time, I was alone with the holy relic.
In between short bits when some old people were coming in and out, I got to focus more on the physical and spiritual reality of the relic before me.
The last time I was here, I was fascinated by how the skull was so small.
Now, I realized it was only the upper part, that is, from the upper jaw to the top of the cranium.
But aside from that, she was also just 12 years old.
Some paintings show her already as a robust woman whose neck could give even the sharpest metal a hard time.
That gross oversight is not only unhistorical, but also takes away from the impressiveness of her martyrdom.
I was mulling on these ideas as I ended my prayer, totally awed by this privileged moment.
Before I end this article, however, maybe just a word about the phrase, "in agone" that forms part of the church's name.
Many people think it's from the word "agony" which would then refer to St.
Agnes's martyrdom.
Tempting as that may be, however, it's not the case.
In fact, the word "agone" is a Latin word derived from the Greek which means "competition" -- because Piazza Navona before was the area of the Stadium of Diocletian where there used to be a lot of...
well, you guessed it.
But, then, of course, it so happens that the English word "agony" does come from agone for all the anguish and suffering that happens in the stadium.
And Saint Agnes suffered the agony of her martyrdom in the "circus agonalis" of this emperor during what is considered the cruelest persecution of Christians in the Roman Empire.
So there is a cosmic coincidence in the name of the church: the place of competition and of anguish.
For Saint Agnes, there was not only competition and anguish; more importantly, there was victory.
This final perseverance in grace, despite all our difficulties, is the one thing we need to pray for ourselves, and the one thing we pray St.
Agnes and Our Lady will obtain for us.

=======
READ MORE:
PART 1:Day 1: Our lady of the Sacred Heart in Sant'Andrea della ValleDay 2: Our Lady and Child in San Salvatore in Onda
PART 3:Day 4: Santa Maria della Strada in the Church of Il Ges\xf9
PART 4:Day 5: Mother of Sorrows in San Carlo ai CatinariDay 6: The Presentation of Mary in Santa Maria in Monticelli
PART 5:Day 7: Holy Mary, Help of the Poor in Santissima Trinit\xe0 dei PelligriniDay 8: Our Lady of Montserrat in Santa Maria in Monserrato degli Spagnoli
PART 6:Day 9: Mother of the Church in St.
Peter's Square at the Opening Mass of the Extraordinary Jubilee Year of Mercy
Pinoy in Rome: At the Door of the Jubilee Year of Mercy , Pinoy in Rome: At the Door of the Jubilee Year of Mercy 
The Il Gesu dome
Robert Z.
Cortes, This is part 3 of the 6-part series of articles documenting the author's experiences as he prepares to welcome the Jubilee Year of Mercy in Rome.
Follow his trip and learn from his experiences right here on Sun.Star.
, Day 4: Santa Maria della Strada in the Church of Il Ges\xf9
AS ONE might already have suspected, considering that the 4th day of the novena to the Immaculate Conception falls on the feast of St.
Francis Xavier  and the patron saint of a bishop very close to me, I made it a point to go to the Church of Il Ges\xf9 to say the Rosary and do my prayer before his relic.
I knew from experience that the Ges\xf9 is often dark.
I had always thought it a pity to be in such a magnificent church, yet unable to appreciate such beauty.
I was hoping against hope that there might be a bit more light when I went, but it was even darker than I remembered.
And to my shock, there was actually a Mass in the side chapel of St.
Francis, and I could hardly hear the priest talking.
"What? Is this how they value this saint, second in only to their Founder in importance?" I must confess I had those scandalized thoughts as I next-to-groped my way through the dimly lit nave, looking for the chapel of the Madonna.
I was pleasantly surprised to see that the side chapel to the right of the sanctuary had more light than the rest of the Church -- it was the Chapel of Our Lady.
But I was even more pleased to see that the image venerated there was the "Santa Maria della Strada" -- a very familiar appellation to me, even if I'm not from The Ateneo, because my friends from that area had introduced me to the image.
There were also very nice paintings  around the small chapel depicting scenes of Our Lady's life.
There was two seminarians  trying to translate the Latin verses written under each painting.
From the agonized looks on their faces and the desperate hand gestures of the African, I could see they didn't have much luck.
I was tempted to help them out but I had to focus on the Rosary.
Now as I was about to finish my Rosary, something remarkable happened.
The entire Church was suddenly lit up.
It was fully lit up and there, for the first time, I saw the full glory of Il Ges\xf9.
O-M-G -- for it would be taking the Lord's name in vain if I spelled that out in full; yet really, that was all I could say.
I had hoped Il Ges\xf9 now would be somehow brighter than my previous times there -- but not this bright.
Really, as many persons can attest, God doesn't do things by halves.
So for the first time, I saw how richly decorated was the statue of St.
Ignatius.
He is brocaded in jewels and venerated in an altar of rich lapiz lazuli and green marble.
And while Pope Francis might be living very poorly, as did St.
Ignatius, I don't think he'd object to this depiction of heavenly glory of his spiritual father and one of the Church's greatest saints.
Then there was the dome and the ceiling.
When I spoke previously about Sant'Agnese's dome as the most magnificent yet I had seen, that was because I had not seen Il Ges\xf9 lit this way.
And while I'm not about to take my words back, I must confess that Sant'Agnese's cupola now has a real contender.
I also loved the main altar which showed the Holy Family.
But I now turn to the real object of my small pilgrimage, who is St.
Francis Xavier.
Il Ges\xf9 is not as fortunate as India which has the saint's incorrupt body.
But it does have his arm, and I couldn't believe my fortune for having gone that close to see the "incorruption" for myself.
But to explain that fortune, I must go back to that Mass at the side chapel.
That was actually a Spanish mass and was attended by some Basques, the people of St.
Francis's region in Spain.
Afterwards, they had their picture taken and seeing that one priest couldn't be in the picture since he had to take the picture, I told him in Spanish that I was willing to do it.
My four semesters of Spanish in college is still quite useful.
So as a "prize" for my voluntary camera work, I was allowed to step right up to the relic.
I was peacefully gazing at the arm when I heard some sort of sighing beside me: "Oh, the arm that blessed my people!" He was an Indian priest and was referring to the fact that this arm had baptized 300,000 Indians.
I was friendly, of course, and asked if he was from Goa, where the saint's body now is, but no, he was from Kerala or some other place with a K.
Anyway, I asked him to take this picture of me gazing at the relic, and he said, "K!" I wondered if had been texting with Filipinos, but I wasn't flippant enough to ask.
I spent the rest of the time praying before the relic and thinking about the saint's zeal for souls.
I read that he had died when only 46 from exhaustion of all the apostolate he was happily doing.
When I was done, I walked the vast expanse of the brightly lit Church still thinking and praying to get even a small part of this saint's zeal.
As I reached the door, it opened and in came the reason for all the light: two cardinals -- an Asian and an African -- were about to celebrate a high mass on the great saint's feast day.
On seeing that, I was secretly relieved that people here valued St.
Francis after all -- though I say that now in jest.
The African cardinal looked at me and being no expert, I wasn't sure what to do.
I simply nodded and smiled and he made a sign of blessing.
I was definitely pleased the cardinal did that, but now that I think of it, I realize that his gesture was just a sign.
It was a gesture that ought to remind me of all the wonderful things I had just experienced in that church.
It was also a reminder of the gesture that had made St.
Francis Xavier great -- a reminder that I  need to pass on all the blessings we receive to everyone we know if we want to be anywhere the glory of St.
Francis Xavier and Our Lady, Santa Maria della Strada! Here's praying that they intercede for us to at least make the first step.

=======
READ MORE:
PART 1:Day 1: Our lady of the Sacred Heart in Sant'Andrea della ValleDay 2: Our Lady and Child in San Salvatore in Onda
PART 2:Day 3: Sant'Agnese in Agone
PART 4:Day 5: Mother of Sorrows in San Carlo ai CatinariDay 6: The Presentation of Mary in Santa Maria in Monticelli
PART 5:Day 7: Holy Mary, Help of the Poor in Santissima Trinit\xe0 dei PelligriniDay 8: Our Lady of Montserrat in Santa Maria in Monserrato degli Spagnoli
PART 6:Day 9: Mother of the Church in St.
Peter's Square at the Opening Mass of the Extraordinary Jubilee Year of Mercy
Pinoy in Rome: At the Door of the Jubilee Year of Mercy , Pinoy in Rome: At the Door of the Jubilee Year of Mercy 
Santa Maria in Monticelli facade
Robert Z.
Cortes, This is part 4 of the 6-part series of articles documenting the author's experiences as he prepares to welcome the Jubilee Year of Mercy in Rome.
Follow his trip and learn from his experiences right here on Sun.Star.
, Day 5: Mother of Sorrows in San Carlo ai Catinari
AT AROUND this time of year, there is one scene in the Roman sky that never fails to impress tourists.
It is those huge swarms of black starlings that move around the city and form very graceful formations in the sky.
If one didn't know what else these huge, graceful clouds of birds were capable of, he or she would then immediately take out his or her camera and then, perhaps with mouth agape, would video the magnificent flight exhibition in the sky.
Of course, the experienced Roman would know how dangerous that position is.
In fact, not only would they not keep their mouths closed, they would even take an umbrella when walking under these swarms -- and especially when these birds land on the plane trees which can be found all over the city.
For it is then when one realizes the stinking truth: these graceful birds actually unload so much excrement on the unsuspecting passerby.
I tell this detail not only because this is an important warning for future tourists here in Rome.
This detail is actually significant to my story on the fifth day of my novena to the Immaculate Conception.
For as I approached the not-so-but-should-be-famous church of San Carlo ai Catinari, and heard from a distance the cacophony of starling sounds and began smelling the stench, both of which became unbearable as I got nearer the plane trees that fronted the church, I knew better than to stand there for a second more.
I positively felt the need to enter the church as fast as I could.
The moment I closed the door behind me, I immediately felt the relief both of body and soul.
I could still hear the unrelenting noise from outside, but it was greatly reduced and I felt quite safe inside the church.
It may sound funny, but really, at the time, it came to my mind that the church was my salvation.
It literally saved me from bird shit by providing a roof over my head and walls to protect my nose and ears.
And what roof and walls: a richly gilded ceiling that only the baroque can offer and walls holding such beautifully adorned chapels.
The main altar holds a painting by Borromini's and Bernini's contemporary and peer in talent, Pietro da Cortona.
It shows St.
Charles Borromeo carrying one of the nails that bore our Lord on the Cross.
Both the painting and the altar that holds it are breathtaking.
But what was more breathtaking for me was the image of Our Lady to the right of the main chapel, the image of Our Lady, Mother of Divine Providence.
The entrance to the chapel shows the baroque in its magnificence -- angels and drapes and all.
Charming as well were the little pillows that bore the names of children born through the intercession of Our Lady: pink for girls, blue for boys.
It was uplifting to see that Italy, which has the lowest birthrate in Europe, is still producing babies as late as 2015.
Our Lady's image, of course, is the most charming of all.
It is said that St.
John Paul II was so fascinated by the beauty of the image that after praying, he exclaimed, "I would like to entrust Rome and myself to this Madonna so beautiful and remarkable..."
I couldn't agree less with that.
But in this visit, what impressed me the most was not, in fact, this image, which I could only see from a bit of distance.
I was struck more by the Madonna Addolorata  that greeted me right at the entrance.
There were no railings to separate me from the image and so I could come very close -- even touch the feet through a hole in the glass.
I stared at the face filled with so much anguish and sorrow -- and I couldn't help but kneel.
Then I realized it was a Friday, the day for the sorrowful mysteries.
Talk about the guidance of Providence.
So before that inspiring image, I prayed for everyone I could remember in that Rosary -- even the Pinoy OFW sitting on the bench some meters behind me.
He had given me a startled and anguished look as I entered the church.
I think I understood his feeling of solitariness and was sorry I couldn't be of any greater help, except to pray.
But I was praying to Our Lady who knew what it was to suffer -- so I'm sure he would be better somehow.
I knew I was.
When I went out of the church, the starlings were still as cacophonous as ever and the stench of their dung so foul.
But I took time to look back at the magnificent facade to appreciate the work done by Giovanni Battista Soria .
What happened to my disgust of starling? Well, it was still there, but having been reminded about how much Our Lady had suffered, what's a little bird shit in this life to stop me from admiring the beauty of God's wonders?
Day 6: The Presentation of Mary in Santa Maria in Monticelli
Seeing that my schedule was going to be full in the afternoon, I decided to do my church visit for the sixth day of the novena to the Immaculate Conception in the morning.
As well, aware that it was Saturday, I wanted to visit a church dedicated to Our Lady.
There are several of these around where I live and I chose one which I just serendipitously discovered some days back, when I decided to make a random turn on my way home.
The relatively small church is called Santa Maria in Monticelli.
It's a very old church, having been consecrated in the early 1100's, such that no one even knows where the name comes from.
It has since then undergone a lot of restoration and the only thing left of the 12th century construction is the bell-tower.
Nevertheless, most of the church that one presently sees is still quite old, having been done in the 1700s and so follows the baroque style.
I walked peacefully for some 5-7 minutes from my house to the church.
The the sky was blue and the morning was peaceful.
There was nothing like the noise I referred to in my Friday visit.
When I entered the church it was even more impressively quiet.
I thought I was alone until I realized there was a man sitting in the very dark side altar where the tabernacle was.
But he pretty soon left and so then, in fact, I had the whole church to myself.
The image of Our Lady on the main altar is the Presentation of the Virgin.
This painting is pretty modern, having been painted only in the 1900s, but it blends pretty well with the baroque pillars and older frescoes flanking it, including the 12th century mosaic of Christ's face above it.
It showed Our Lady so innocent and pure.
It was a perfect time and place to be saying the Rosary on that Saturday morning.
In between Hail Mary's, I would look up and see frescoed on the ceiling the famous women of the Old Testament.
I'd look to my right and left and see the Flagellation here and the image of Mary, Help of Christians there.
Was that contemplation or distraction? Probably doesn't matter.
For then, I was reminded that amidst all the things we call trials in this life, there are many things both in this life and in the next that we can thank God for.
As well, the quiet and peace in that church that morning helped me to pray for those who don't have it in these moments - both physically and spiritually.
If these were, in fact, distractions I entertained in prayer inside this randomly found church, I hope nevertheless they can still help me prepare for the Jubilee Year of Mercy.
I guess Mary, who "keeps these things in her heart," and so not that easily distracted, will make sure of that.


=======
READ MORE:
PART 1:Day 1: Our lady of the Sacred Heart in Sant'Andrea della ValleDay 2: Our Lady and Child in San Salvatore in Onda
PART 2:Day 3: Sant'Agnese in Agone
PART 3:Day 4: Santa Maria della Strada in the Church of Il Ges\xf9
PART 5:Day 7: Holy Mary, Help of the Poor in Santissima Trinit\xe0 dei PelligriniDay 8: Our Lady of Montserrat in Santa Maria in Monserrato degli Spagnoli
PART 6:Day 9: Mother of the Church in St.
Peter's Square at the Opening Mass of the Extraordinary Jubilee Year of Mercy
Pinoy in Rome: At the Door of the Jubilee Year of Mercy , Pinoy in Rome: At the Door of the Jubilee Year of Mercy 
Santa Maria Spagnoli - Facade
Robert Z.
Cortes, This is part 5 of the 6-part series of articles documenting the author's experiences as he prepares to welcome the Jubilee Year of Mercy in Rome.
Follow his trip and learn from his experiences right here on Sun.Star.
, Day 7: Holy Mary, Help of the Poor in Santissima Trinit\xe0 dei Pelligrini
THE seventh day of my novena to the Immaculate Conception in preparation for the Jubilee Year of Mercy happened to fall on a Sunday.
Providentially, there's a church dedicated to the Blessed Trinity just two minutes away walking from my house.
The day being a Sunday and with me having very little time for the visit, this church was perfect.
Unlike yesterday, today was rather cloudy, even gloomy.
This atmosphere seemed to be in perfect harmony with this church, both outside and in.

It's called Santissima Trinit\xe0 dei Pelligrini  and is called such because back in the 1500s, it had a hospice for poor pilgrims right beside it.
The hospice is already closed as a victim of politics from the 19th to the 20th century, a sad reminder of an only too-common phenomenon that in political rancor, the victims are often the poor.
The church itself used to be glorious, especially right after it housed 140,000 pilgrims in the Jubilee Year of 1575, and got a real boosting from Roman officials impressed by that feat.
Now, the facade is probably one of the shabbiest in Rome.
And if Benedict XVI had not made it the base of the Personal Parish of the Extraordinary for of the Roman Rite, perhaps the church would have been more rundown still.
When I went in, I saw that the church was dark -- even darker than the Ges\xf9 on a normal day -- and cold, even with my thick black coat on.
I noticed that most tourists who came in never went past the first chapel.
They'd give the whole church a quick survey and leave, pretty much like some people  who many times give a street bum a quick glance from head to foot and then move on.
They were not impressed even by the remarkable painting of the Blessed Trinity by Guido Reni in the main altar.
Naturally, as a result, they also missed the venerated and miraculous picture of Our Lady, Help of the Poor  which has both a chapel and a small altar in its honor.
I prayed before the one on the altar because it had more illumination and was more beautifully crowned.
It also had that Latin title of Our Lady written in clear and bold letters, as if to tell me, "Go to her, oh you who are so poor and miserable."
Got it -- loud and clear! I couldn't fight that, naturally, and the message really did get me to pray more fervently for myself and "everyone I know -- even those I've forgotten." I learned that style of praying from St.
Josemaria who used to add the phrase "etiam ignotis"  to his prayer of thanks for graces received.
Then, unconsciously, I clutched my thick black coat closer because it was getting really cold -- a fact, as it were, that reminded me further of the misery in the world.

And then, when I looked down from the image to the left, I saw a small sheet of paper that further acknowledged that reminder.
It bore the pathetic plea of someone who has felt  keenly the suffering and misery of humanity.
"Mother Mary," it said, "Pray for the victims in Paris, Mumbay, Tunis, etc." Europe to Asia to Africa.
He or she forgot America and Australia, so I had to add them as ellipses -- but I'm sure they were in her mind too.
Like that title of Our Lady reminding me of my misery, that prayer struck me, as well, for just a couple of weeks ago, Piazza Farnese, where the embassy of France in Rome is, just right down the corner, was strewn with flowers, lit with vigil lamps, buzzing with media, and filled with a sympathetic crowd for the victims of the recent terrorist attack in Paris.
How odd, I thought, all these things coming together in this single moment of my life.
I left that church more pensive and sober than when I entered.
How much, indeed, we need God's mercy and the intercession of Mary.
Maybe not a very inappropriate thought as I approach the doorstep of the Jubilee Year of Mercy.
Day 8: Our Lady of Montserrat in Santa Maria in Monserrato degli Spagnoli
For the eve of the Solemnity of the Immaculate Conception, and the beginning of the Year of Mercy, I was directed to go to Santa Maria in Monserrato degli Spagnoli.
The name suggests that this 16th and 17th church is dedicated to Mary under the title of Our Lady of Montserrat , patroness of the proud Spanish region of Catalu\xf1a, and is the national church of the Spaniards in Rome.
I won't go into details what I really mean by "I was directed to go." The most I'll mention is that I was vacillating between this church  and a very strong alternative  as of yesterday morning -- and then I received a totally random Facebook message from a friend in the Philippines.
She was asking about an image of Our Lady of Pilar.
Being a Spanish icon, it's rare in Italy, and most probably found only in this church.
In a flash, all my doubts were settled.
I also won't go into details about the political implications of this Catalonian image being the representative of all Spain: too incendiary.
In fact, even the name Montserrat may spark  emotions from both Catalans and non-Catalans, for the word is not Spanish but Catal\xe1n meaning "saw mountain" .
 
Lastly, I won't go into details about the meaning of "national church" since I've explained that already in some other post.
Only perhaps that being a national church of what used to be the most powerful nation in the world , this is one of those that has retained its renaissance and baroque elegance.
I will just say that now that I think of it, I found it quite providential and thus, appropriate, that I should be there on the eve of the feast of the Immaculate Conception, the Patroness of the Philippines.
It's an appropriate way to thank Spain which brought Christianity to my country only three years after  this church was founded  and for which I am now here.
That detail was quite clear to me as I knelt before the Dark Madonna to say the Rosary with baroque music playing in the background.
Thus aside from praying for my myriad personal intentions, I thought about the people who live with me now, who are all Spanish speaking, except one.
That thought led me to remember and pray as well for all the Spanish-speaking peoples of the world -- that they may be faithful to the Faith that has built their nations.

And that thought in turn led me to remember that the Pope himself is Spanish speaking.
I will be with him tomorrow as he opens the Jubilee Door -- so there was probably no better shrine to go to today, to pray for him and prepare for that historic moment.
It's amazing what a random Facebook message can do.

=======
READ MORE:
PART 1:Day 1: Our lady of the Sacred Heart in Sant'Andrea della ValleDay 2: Our Lady and Child in San Salvatore in Onda
PART 2:Day 3: Sant'Agnese in Agone
PART 3:Day 4: Santa Maria della Strada in the Church of Il Ges\xf9
PART 4:Day 5: Mother of Sorrows in San Carlo ai CatinariDay 6: The Presentation of Mary in Santa Maria in Monticelli
PART 6:Day 9: Mother of the Church in St.
Peter's Square at the Opening Mass of the Extraordinary Jubilee Year of Mercy
Arena Island offers an exclusive holiday getaway, Arena Island offers an exclusive holiday getaway
The beachfront of Arena Island has provisions that allow guests to bask under the sun and enjoy the peacefulness of a clear day.
HOLIDAYS are best spent away from the crowded streets of the city, especially at Christmastime.
For anyone who2019s craving to get away, Palawan is always a good idea.
After all, it is the 2015 best island in the world, according to a luxury and lifestyle travel magazine.
Palawan's best-kept secret, Arena Island, offers a tranquil and serene setting, perfect for a group, couple, or solo holiday getaway.
The four-hectare private island is set off the coast of the municipality of Narra, three hours away from the capital, Puerto Princesa City.
Arena Island has a unique blend of privacy and comfort because guests can have the island all to themselves during their stay.
The visitors are given value through exclusive and personalized services of a highly trained crew, comprised of professional chefs and butlers.
The Casa and the native-themed Casita, best for a couple2019s honeymoon, are the premier accommodations at Arena Island.
Group travelers, meanwhile, can relish their break with the gentle breeze in the Pavilion, which accommodates up to 15 single mattresses.
The appeal of Arena Island goes into its culinary treats as well.
Guests have the privilege to choose what will be served on their table.
They can select from a wide range of home-cooked meals of fresh seafood caught around the island.
Moreover, guests can choose among the Casita2019s verandas, the beachfront, the treehouse, the sandbar, or the canopy of trees as the backdrop of their meals.
A visit on Arena Island will not be completely amazing without trying the water adventures such as snorkeling, diving and kayaking.
The guests will have the chance to witness and get close to the 30-hectare aquatic paradise home to a marine life and resources.
Aside from providing exclusive services and fun activities, Arena Island has also been practicing eco-conservation and sustainability in its operations to promote ecotourism.
It strengthened its efforts by taking part in the Zero Carbon Resorts  project under the EU SWITCH-Asia program and initiated by GrAT-Center for Appropriate Technology and its partners -- ASSIST, PCSD, PhilGBC and Plataforma Solar de Almer\xeda Centro de Investigaciones Energeticas, Medioambientales y Tecnologicas , the largest European center for research, development and testing of concentrating solar technologies.
The ZCR project aims to enable small and medium-sized enterprises  in Palawan and other parts of the Philippines to switch from using fossil fuels to utilizing renewable sources of energy.
With that, Arena Island encourages its guests to participate in the conservation practices by switching off the light during day time to save energy.
The island has been using solar panel units for lighting purposes even before it opened its doors to guests.
Arena Island is also known to be a breeding ground for pawikans, the Philippines2019 native sea turtles.
Thus, Arena Island continues to espouse the protection and conservation of the precious creatures through its advocacy program, Pugad Pawikan Pilipinas, which seeks to preserve endangered species of sea turtles.
At least 200 eggs come out with 45 to 50 days of incubation.
Custodians of Arena Island take care of the hatchlings and release them back to sea after a month.
Guests can partake in the releasing process and sponsor related costs to ensure the protection and health of the gentle creatures before they go back to the sea.
201cWe, at Arena Island, strongly believe that we have responsibility to the environment and we have to continue with our efforts to make the island more sustainable for the years to come,201d said Roland Rodriquez, a native of Cuyo, Palawan and the island2019s proprietor and protector.
With its right mix of privacy, personalized service, and commitment to the environment, the secluded Arena Island is perfectly made for travel enthusiasts.
More information is available at www.arenaisland.com.

Pinoy in Rome: At the Door of the Jubilee Year of Mercy , Pinoy in Rome: At the Door of the Jubilee Year of Mercy 
Filipinas with loved ones in Rome - from readers' right Monet, Gina, and Rosie
Robert Z.
Cortes, This is the last part of the 6-part series of articles documenting the author's experiences as he prepares to welcome the Jubilee Year of Mercy in Rome.
Follow his trip and learn from his experiences right here on Sun.Star.
, Day 9: Mother of the Church in St.
Peter's Square at the Opening Mass of the Extraordinary Jubilee Year of Mercy
TO BE in St.
Peter's Square, attending Pope's Mass, not only for the Solemnity of the Immaculate Conception, but also for the Opening of the Extraordinary Jubilee Year of Mercy, is indeed a great grace.
If I add to that the fact that my being in Italy for a year more happened only through some honest mistake, and the ticket I had for this Mass was volunteered to me when I had despaired of it, then I can do nothing, but bow my head in awe at the Mercy of a Providence who knows what I need even if don't.
That Providence included skipping an incredibly long line going into the square through a coincidental meeting with a friend bishop.
He offered me a lift, and so I entered the square from the Vatican Gardens, feeling like some important V.I.P.
without having to elbow my way through my fellow hoi polloi.
The feeling didn't last long since I was only too aware that V.I.P's don't stay in the Square.
Besides, a guard stopped me: he seemed bewildered that a short, non-bow-tied Asian was walking in that area.
The easiest way out was to squash all my remaining internal pretensions to VIP-hood and claim I was the driver of the bishop .
I know that struggling through the monstrous line would have been Providence, too, but skipping it probably averted my fainting in the line since, wanting to make it early, I hadn't had a decent breakfast.

Providence it was, too, that the forecast said it was nearly 50% going to rain, but it only drizzled a bit -- as if to test our faith and give us an opportunity for greater merit -- but in the end, I didn't have to open my umbrella.
By the time of the Gospel, the skies began to clear.
By the time the Pope was opening the Holy Door, the sun was blazing in the cool air.
It's not my intention to end this article this soon by talking about the end of the ceremony this early; rather I wanted to point out that many times, we receive from God what is contrary to what men say we would .
And the fact is, what we receive is always better -- this is how Providence is.
We know this is true from personal experience.
On the contrary, the choices of human beings, at times, are not even good or just.
That idea struck me with some special force during the prayer of the faithful at Mass.
We prayed for lawmakers and governments -- that they may serve all men and be passionate for justice and peace.
We prayed for sinners and the violent -- that they may know the gravity of evil and their hearts may receive healing.
The face that the former was said in Arabic, and the latter in French spoke to me.
Did the appropriate Vatican office choose those languages on purpose for whatever reason, or was that providential as well? Maybe both?  
But conspiracy theories aside, there were other truly striking moments as well: striking and moving.
There was the instance when I spotted an empty seat in the fast-filling square and asked the Italian lady sitting beside it if I could take it.
She told me with a concerned look, "Yes, but it's wet." Since I was wearing thick jeans anyway, I smiled and said, "It doesn't matter."  But before I could sit, she had already taken out a piece of tissue paper and wiped the seat dry for me.
Wow -- mercy from a woman from Sicily I had met only 5 seconds ago.
She now reminded me of my mother.
There was the instance when, after praying the rosary to prepare for Mass, we sang the Salve.
No one said anything, and certainly nothing was shown on screen to indicate it, but spontaneously everyone stood and the whole square resounded in singing the Salve Regina .
And because the hymn was part of the celebration at the end of the Mass, Our Lady got a double salvo of Salve's on her big day.
It's just as well, since we know that if we want God to have mercy on us, the best way is to pray through the Mother of Mercy who is his mother.

Then there were the instances when Pope Francis manifested his connection to his predecessors.
First, he referred once more to his predecessor, Blessed Paul VI, in the context of another Holy Door that opened the Church 50 years ago "to the men and women of our time": Vatican II.
Later he greeted Benedict XVI, whose humble and meek presence there moved many people to tears -- at least I was.
At the Angelus, the Pope asked the people to shout out a greeting of affection to "Papa Benedetto." I don't know if Pope Francis meant all these gestures to mean what I understood them to be, but it is this: that Providence is taking care of the Church in the continuity of its holy pastors.
Lastly, there were the testimonies of people I randomly interviewed for this article at the end of the ceremony.
I asked the Sicilian beside me if she came just for this and she roundly said, "Si!" It turns out she had an entire barrio with her, and when asked why they came for the Jubilee despite the distance, they responded simultaneously.
The response was cheerfully chaotic and can be summarized as: "We are faithful, we believe in Jesus!" This same idea was echoed by two young ladies in front of me, one of whom I noticed knelt on the uncomfortable sanpietrini during the consecration.
That was Laura, a Mexican, and she was with Courtney from New York.

The most moving testimony, of course, came from our kababayans, three of whom I spotted as I was leaving the square.
As it turned out, they were sisters all working in Rome.
It was Rosie who spoke for the group.

"Matagal na po naming hinihintay itong Jubilee na ito.
Kahit ano pa ang sinasabi nila na nakakatakot dahil dun sa nangyari sa Paris, wala po kaming pakialam.
Ang alam namin, ang Panginoon ang kasama namin at walang mas malakas, kundi Siya ho." She explained this in the context of their children's and relatives' fears for their safety back home.
Amidst Gina's and Monet's  comments of "Faith, po!" "Mga anak namin, takot!" I saw tears form in Rosie's eyes, and I had to exert effort to suppress mine, for I remembered my sister telling me as well, "Take care." Ah, the faith of the Filipino and the love among the Filipino's family.
Such experience of the universality of the Church and the strength of faithful's faith could only make me see how appropriate it was to be in St.
Peter's Square celebrating Mary's big solemnity and asking for God's Mercy with the Pope, under the gaze of Our Lady, Mother of the Church.
It's that mosaic image that meets your eyes as you look up to the right when you're facing the Basilica.
 This was indeed a great grace.
But it is also a reminder that the Providence, who knows what I need even if don't and from whom I receive all grace and mercy, is sending me -- and you -- as His instruments of grace and mercy to everyone we meet.


=======
READ MORE:
PART 1:Day 1: Our lady of the Sacred Heart in Sant'Andrea della ValleDay 2: Our Lady and Child in San Salvatore in Onda
PART 2:Day 3: Sant'Agnese in Agone
PART 3:Day 4: Santa Maria della Strada in the Church of Il Ges\xf9
PART 4:Day 5: Mother of Sorrows in San Carlo ai CatinariDay 6: The Presentation of Mary in Santa Maria in Monticelli
PART 5:Day 7: Holy Mary, Help of the Poor in Santissima Trinit\xe0 dei PelligriniDay 8: Our Lady of Montserrat in Santa Maria in Monserrato degli Spagnoli
Anti-child porn avatar Sweetie levels up, Anti-child porn avatar Sweetie levels upMANILA -- As worldwide attention on webcam child sex tourism snowballs, the Sweetie campaign in the Philippines also intensifies.

In 2013, international anti-child exploitation organization Terre des Hommes Netherlands unveiled Sweetie, a virtual 10-year-old Filipina girl with a very distinct task of identifying pedophiles around the globe in selected public chatrooms.

In a span of 10 weeks and in 19 public chatrooms, Sweetie identified at least 1,000 pedophiles.
Of which, 8 known convictions have taken place in countries like Australia, the United Kingdom, Belgium, and Denmark.

The United Nations and the U.S.
Federal Bureau of Investigation said that at least 750,000 pedophiles are online at any given time.
As such, tens of thousands of Filipino children fall prey to the perils of online pornography.

Based on initial investigation conducted by Terre des Hommes, Filipino children seem to have an extraordinary appeal to both casual and hardcore pedophiles wanting to offer financial rewards to children forced to perform sexually in front of the camera.
After trying several other nationalities, Terre des Hommes concluded that reception was overwhelming when Sweetie divulged her being Filipino.
To step up the game, Sweetie has advanced.
Public chatrooms will no longer be monitored manually.
Instead, chatbots will go online 24/7 to patrol the cyberspace and intervene before the crime is committed.

Sweetie 2.0, as the project is called, is now on its final phase of development and full operations are set to happen by April 2016.

In a collaborative effort with national and international specialists, Terre des Hommes works on an innovative software to be implemented worldwide to combat online streaming of child porn materials.

Bong Arquiza, communications and advocacy officer of Terre des Hommes, emphasizes how this will be aligned to both domestic and international legal frameworks.

201cSweetie 2.0 will definitely be compliant with legal standards, locally and overseas.
Much as we believe that a free and open source internet should be in place, the internet does not have to be lawless.
Sweetie may be controversial but this innovation is very crucial and essential especially for the Filipino children,201d he said.

Arquiza further stressed that 201cwebcam child sex tourism is normally the precursor of child trafficking as these pedophiles would eventually come to the country to meet the victims.201d
Meanwhile, the Philippine Country Office of Terre des Hommes has launched a simultaneous online collection of signatures to compel the Philippine government to take a stand against webcam child sex tourism by delivering a public statement in an international gathering condemning this new trend as well as refusing to tolerate the victimization of Filipino kids through this scheme.
 Terre des Hommes is also conducting campus caravans across the country to promote the campaign.

Terre des Hommes2019 multifaceted effort to strengthen the online protection of children is coupled with a research project on the psychosocial effects on victims of webcam child sex tourism and an international conference on the same, which both is expected to also happen in the first quarter of 2016.

Philippine eagle hatched in captivity, Philippine eagle hatched in captivityTHE Philippine Eagle Foundation  announced on Thursday the hatching of the 26th chick from its conservation breeding program around 1:20 p.m.
last December 7.
Now at two days old, PEF curator Anna Mae Sumaya believes "this chick will make it."
The eaglet, which hatched after 56 days of incubation, is the offspring of natural pair 201cGo Phoenix201d  and 201cMVP Eagle201d .

201cAssistance in hatching was done during the first few hours of the whole hatching process but the chick did it on its own when it hatched full-term,201d Sumaya said.
201cAt two days old, the chick can already lift its head and get food from forceps.
It2019s also very active 2013 very attentive and observant of its surroundings.
The chick responds to some bird calls heard from the background sound.201d
The chick is the first fertile egg and also the first offspring of the pair since they became partners in 2013.

"This hatching is a big breakthrough for us and is the result of nearly five years of round robin pairing amongst our younger set of eagles at the center,201d PEF executive director Dennis Salvador explained.
201cWe are proud of our conservation breeding team for their perseverance at this very challenging task.201d
The PEF believes that this success will rekindle hope for the species and usher a new generation of eagles to strengthen the captive gene pool and augment wild populations.
"This is our gift to the Filipino people and the rest of the world this Christmas," Salvador said.

Happy thoughts, Happy thoughtsChristine Joice C.
Cudis, THIS young artist strives to encourage people from outside Mindanao to see the island the way she does, not as a place of war but a place where wonderful sceneries and beautiful people exist.

Maan Chua, one of Davao's best performing singer/songwriter, has worked her way up to the limelight in the city through composing positive songs that tells about how good it is to be a Mindanaoan.

"The internet has drawn a not good picture of our place.
We have to make a move on proving this wrong, Mindanao should not be identified that way.
There is so much more in what those articles say than what really happens here," she said.

She started her career in high school where she belonged in a band called Ska.
Back then, she used to play alternative and rock music and just like any ordinary teenager, she also enjoyed listening to Alanis Morissette, Cranberry, and Metallica.

"While studying, I also have time to play pop songs in restaurants and bars who requested me." 
At age of 16, she already have gigs in a restaurant along Diversion Road, Shindig Bar in Buhangin, and at Matina Town Square.

"My nights were filled with a lot of gigs but I knew back then that I still have something huge within that I have not discovered yet." 
It was only when Mebuyan, an all-women theatre and musical storytelling group found her in 2002 when her music preference changed.

"It was the turning point of my career.
Mebuyan has made me become who I am today, an artist telling stories of her roots." 
With all the projects coming her way, Maan admitted that she once wanted to pursue her career to greater heights and auditioned in Manila.

"My husband made me realize that I do not have to add up the long line of hopeful musicians in Luzon because I am already geographically in place.
I only have to do what I love to do until they hear me." 
Today, she is given the privilege to play in musical events not only in Luzon but outside the country as well.

She has also released albums that are on display in Balik Bukid, Coffee for Peace, and Museo Dabawenyo.

When asked about what she considers as her greatest achievement is, she said, "I do not really consider physical awards as my achievements." 
Maan added that what she considers as her trophy is the reaction from the public that she got from the song, Itadyak.

"It was my defining moment as an artist.
The song reflected who I am as a person and what kind of music I write as an artist." 
At present, when Maan has the time, she conducts workshops and seminars to whoever that is interested so she can pass on her legacy to the other artists.

"I do it to inspire them that one does not need to be a music student to be successful in this industry.
Passion is the ultimate fuel for success."  
To the young generation of artists, Maan says the ride is not going to be easy.
But if they let their passion control them, then they will be led to their destination.

"Never stop writing songs.
Just wait for that one piece that will define you as an artist and satisfaction will take over your soul.
Continue performing!" 
A cozy nook in old Davao, A cozy nook in old Davao
Pepperplate
Stella A.
Estremera, IF YOU hear someone say, 201cPepperplate201d, don2019t laugh out loud yet because that someone might really mean 201cPepperplate201d and not 201cpaper plate201d.
Pepperplate is the tiny restaurant along Palma Gil Street across Royal Mandaya Hotel that has its own followers.
With just four tiny tables good for two and four others good for four, it was a full house by the time our orders arrived Thursday, although only one had four in a group and all others only had two per table.
Just like us.
Us being just Imee and me.
The other members of the gang were still somewhere else, while it will be a very limited choice for Miggy, a pesca-vegetarian.
I got the baby back ribs because the waitress said that is their specialty.
For baby back orders, you get your choice of sidings: it can be plain rice, mashed potato, corn, and other stuff.
But one item in the sidings list intrigued me: 3 Rice.
The waitress said it2019s made of three kinds of rice: black rice, brown rice, and white rice.
Imee got the Cajun beef strips salad and onion rings.
The place serves diner type food, so expect that when you come a-visiting.
I was sorely tempted to order the Spam Fries with Sriracha Mayo because the table across ordered it and it looked cute served in its own can, but the baby back ribs  is really more than a normal tummy can take in.
By the way, I liked my 3 Rice.
It has some other flavors cooked into it beyond just garlic.
The Onion Rings had a good batter, it didn2019t get soggy nor oily, which is good.
It2019s a quiet place, no blaring music there, and that is good, too.
I still can2019t figure out eating places that play loud music as if you2019re in a club.
Dining after all is about appreciating food and conversations, not shouting at each other because the music2019s drowning out your voices.
Being along Palma Gil Street, the old downtown, the neighborhood is quiet as well as it is tucked between the busy Claveria and Ponciano and there2019s not much traffic in this short strip especially at night.
They have more offerings that are worth trying.
Next time I2019ll reserve tummy space for that Spam Fries simply because it looked cute in its own can, and maybe one of Pepperplate2019s burgers and finger food.
Pepperplate also serves imported beer brands including Stella Artois.
Villanueva celebrates its 20181st Bongloy Festival2019, Villanueva celebrates its 20181st Bongloy Festival2019Riain Alfonso, THE municipality of Villanueva celebrates its town fiesta, the Feast of Our Lady of Guadalupe, from December 9 to 13 this year with a series of activities.

Last December 11, 2015, the town held its first Bongloy Festival Street Dancing Competition which was participated by eleven barangays held at the town basketball court fronting the church.
201cGikalipay gyud nako ug dako na finally na change and name,201d said Department of Tourism Regional Director, Catalino E.
Chan III, who was espousing for an original-themed festival for Villanueva versus the Mardi Gras inspired festivities it had been doing in the previous years.

He went on to share the history of Villanueva which was once known as Bongloy because of the many bongloy trees found in the area.
The place was renamed after a certain Mexican-American soldier, Captain Villanueva.
He was asked by Father Gregorio Parache, S.J., the parish priest of Jasaan at that time, to assist him in the planning and development of potable water and irrigation system in Bongloy.

As the years passed, the Magahat natives started calling Bongloy as Villanueva in honor of the captain.
The history of the municipality has been handed down from one generation to the next through word of mouth and, according to town old-timers, both Father Parache and Captain Villanueva had been instrumental in getting the warring tribes in the area to create peaceful relationships.
201cWe are so proud that in the whole region of Northern Mindanao, this is the only street festival na gi-held sa gabii,201d said Chan.

He hopes that in the next two to three years, DOT will be able to include Bongloy Festival in the list of DOT accredited festivals in the Philippines.

201cNext year, muhatag mi ug 10,000 pesos sa contingent na muhatag ug maayong storya sa presentation sa street dancing ug sa tableau para makita gyud kong gi-unsa ug interpret ang atong history.
Ug hinaut unta na mangita ta ug real Villanueva beat,201d he furthered.

Aside from Chan, the event was attended by Mayor Julio Uy, Misamis Oriental 2nd District Representative Juliette Uy, as well as the rest of the municipal officers and barangay captains.

The 11 barangay contingents, in their creative and colorful costumes, headgears, and props, gave their all during the competition.
The dancers were all energetic and smiling, and were all enthusiastic in their interpretation of the Bongloy story.

In trying to outdo one another, they presented intricate formations with one barangay even bringing in an actual 2018bangka2019 during the dance.

Small town camaraderie reigned supreme during the event with each barangay being composed of an eclectic 20 to 30 dancers, both young and old with parents and their kids participating.
 It was truly a night of Villanueva culture and history on display.

Teams were judged based on mastery and execution, creativity and uniqueness of chorography, adaptation of the Bongloy story, the costumes and props, and musicality.

The night2019s big winners were Barangay Balacanas, 3rd place; Barangay Imelda placing 2nd, and the Grand Champion, Barangay Poblacion 1.
They were also the winners in last year2019s Mardi Gras competition.

Poblacion 1 won a cash prize of 50,000 pesos and a trophy.
After the winners were announced, the Villanueva night sky was peppered with bright lights from a spectacular fireworks display.

201cIt2019s overwhelming,201d said Odi Parataman, from Poblacion 1, 201cWe didn2019t expect na mahitabo ni sa amo.
Actually, wala mi nag-expect na kami ang makadaog.
Nawala ang kakapoy.
Three weeks, four weeks na practice, worth it kaayo.201d 
He added, 201cVery proud ko na from Villanueva ko.
 Nindot puy-an, life is here, kung baga.201d
201cSa Villanueva, makita nimo na happy ang mga tao.
Then in terms sa kalingawan, naay unity, panaghini-usa,201d said Erlon Casi\xf1o adding that the event was fun, 201cBibo kaayo.
Sa ingon ani na pamaagi, malingaw ang mga tao ug usa pod siya sa highlights sa among fiesta.201d
201cAtong gipalawom ang atong tema nga ang panaghi-usa moy dalan sa kalambo-an,201d said Mayor Uy.
201cPara atong ipakita sa tanan barangay, ang mga lumulopyo sa tanan barangay nagkahi-usa.
Kay kung dili sila magkahi-usa, maslisod nato makab-ot ang development or kalambo-an,201d said the mayor adding that since he started serving Villanueva in the 201890s, there has been a lot of development and changes in the community.
201cSa paningkamot sa mga lungsoranon, possible sa sunod tuig, mahimo na kami na 1st class municipality.
Tungod kini sa kapaspas sa pag-uswag sa lungsod.201d 
Mayor Uy furthered that his plans for the succeeding years will include focusing on the youth sector, road concreting of provincial roads, an improvement on the water systems for the barangays, and health care and social services for the town folks.
The activities lined up for the town fiesta included Pinoy Broadway which was the Villanueva Teachers2019 Night last December 9th; the drum and bugle presentation, the Youth Night featuring the Bongloy Performance Arts Guild and Purok Youth Organization, and the Night Caf\xe9 on the 10th; a boxing at the park event and a live drama presentation on the 12th; and, the Fluvial Mass and Sayaw Ta Uy! Party on the 13th.

Celebrating the Manobo's unity for land and culture , Celebrating the Manobo's unity for land and culture Tyrone Velez, DRUMBEATS from a kawayan pole filled the air in the UCCP Haran as the Manobos from elders to children wore their bright indigenous garb of glowing red and blue, dancing and glowing with smiles to greet their visitors to their event.
It was a festive mood inside the evacuation shelter last November 30, as some 300 Talaingod Manobo evacuees were joined by 500 other lumad evacuees and support groups in the 21st celebration of their organization Salugpongan Ta 'Tanu Igkanugon.
The celebration was highlighted with a collective ritual of datus in sacrificing a pig.
Later, songs and dances were performed by Manobo students that dramatized the history of their struggles in Talaingod; from the onslaught of logging operations in the 90s to the formation of Salugpongan to resist the entry of the Alcantara and Sons' IFMA project, and the current attacks on their community schools.

Even as these Lumads have been detached from their communities for months due to the military presence and harassment in their village, there are reasons for these Manobos to be in high spirits.
As Salugpongan Vice-Chair Datu Ginomow Andil told the audience, this is a show of growing support to what their leader Datu Guibang Apoga started 21 years ago.
The full name of Salugpongan means Unity in Defense of Ancestral Land, which was formed by several Talaingod datus under the leadership of Guibang to oppose the pro-Alsons stand of their municipal mayor Jose Libayao.
 In protest, they brought 700 community members to the same UCCP Haran 21 years ago to force Davao City Mayor Rodrigo Duterte to mediate for a boundary barring IFMA in Salugpongan areas.
Such protest, said other datus from neighboring tribes, have influenced them to resist various attacks in their communities.
Datu Mintroso Malibatu from the neighboring Kapalong, Davao del Norte said Salugpongan taught Kapalong Manobos the importance of struggle.
 "Talaingod became our model of struggling from being exploited by the government." Their organization Karadyawan was formed right after Salugpongan, which also fought against logging and paramilitary presence in their area.

Datu Jimboy Mandagit from San Fernando, Bukidnon, added that Salugpongan's call for the exodus of Manobos is not a call out of fear.
"It is a high form of protest.
If we just stay in our community we might be wiped out by the paramilitary and no one will ever hear our cries," said Mandagit.
The influence of Talaingod is also historic, says UP Mindanao anthropology Professor Myfel Joseph Paluga.
He said Lumads in the Spanish colonial times have communed in the Pantaron Range in the boundary of Talaingod and Bukidnon.
 This is a symbol of their resistance, and development of their cultures which continues until now, said Paluga.
In the late 1990s to the following decade, Salugpongan leaders appealed to their support groups to help them to set up schools for their children.
 Datu Onie Bongkalas said, "We have seen before that our children were never given education.
So we asked the government first, then the support groups from the church to help us set up schools."
The Rural Missionaries of the Philippines started with literacy schools in Talaingod.
In 2007, the formal school of Salugpongan Community Learning Center was established and has built 38 community schools in sitios spreading to other municipalities in Davao del Norte, providing pre-school to high school education to more than 1,000 children.
 Aside from schools, health centers were also built to address the health concerns from children to mothers.
Their education component also included the appreciation of their Lumad culture such as songs, dances and rituals, and importantly, the value of the ancestral land to their identity.
But such flourishing has been met with the recent military encampment and forced recruitment of the Lumads to join the paramilitary group Alamara.
  Eight Salugpongan leaders have been victims of extrajudicial killings due to militarization in recent years.
But the Manobos of Talaingod and neighboring towns remain firm to stay in Haran until their calls will be heeded.
"We continue our struggle not for ourselves, but for the next generation.
To let them have the right to education and not the militarization," said Mandagit.
Stakeholders, partners greet Sun.Star Bacolod on its 7th year, Stakeholders, partners greet Sun.Star Bacolod on its 7th yearCarla N.
Canet, PARTNERS and stakeholders of Sun.Star Bacolod greeted the paper yesterday as it kicked off its week-long anniversary celebration from Dec.
14 to 19.
 
Local officials or their representatives, media partners, management of SM Supermalls, and campus journalists joined the editorial, marketing, and administrative departments of Sun.Star Bacolod as it opened its exhibit/booth at SM City Bacolod yesterday.
The exhibit/booth, located at the second floor of the mall2019s new wing, is open daily from 10 a.m.
to 7 p.m.
The first 100 mall goers to visit the booth every day get free copies of the day2019s paper.
They also have a chance to win prizes at the booth, which will run until Friday.
Gracing the exhibit/ booth opening were Acting Bacolod Mayor Greg Gasataya, former vice mayor Renecito Novero who represented Bacolod Rep.
Evelio Leonardia, executive assistant Eric Loretizo representing Gov.
Alfredo Mara\xf1on Jr., Joy Veloso, SM Supermalls vice president for Operations in the Visayas, George Jardiolin, mall manager, Julia Javellana, assistant mall manager, and Negros Press Club president Dolores Epacta.
Campus journalists of Negros Occidental High School, Domingo Lacson National High School, Bata National High School, and Bacolod City National High School, and Mass Communications students of the University of Negros Occidental-Recoletos were also present.

The theme of this year2019s anniversary is 201cShining Brighter at 7.201d
In his speech, Sun.Star Bacolod Publishing, Inc.
president Jaime Golez said Sun.Star Bacolod turned seven years under him as president, but before his tenure, it has been existing for 13 years already under a different management.
Sun.Star Bacolod belongs to the largest network of community newspapers in the country, with 11 affiliates: Baguio, Cagayan de Oro, Cebu, Davao, Dumaguete, Iloilo, Manila, Pampanga, Pangasinan, Tacloban, and Zamboanga.
201cA paper is supposed to inform, entertain, and educate.
But a paper, knowing what it is now, cannot just be an impersonal piece of business venture; it has to be a missionary work.
Each one who works in a newspaper is considered a missionary worker as you cannot stay long in the industry if one lacks the needed commitment.
People who are committed to work, to deliver the news, and to help inform the public that helps improve the community,201d Golez said.
\xa0
He thanked SM Supermalls for providing Sun.Star Bacolod a space for the exhibit.
Gasataya, who was once a campus journalist and a broadcaster, congratulated Sun.Star in doing its share in nation-building by delivering the news that help improve the image of the city and by being a constructive critic.

Novero said he and Leonardia congratulate Sun.Star for delivering a balanced, truthful, and quality journalism.
201cWe are always supportive of quality journalism which we always find in Sun.Star," he added.
Jardiolin said that SM Supermalls will continue to be a partner of every media entity as it has many programs for its corporate social responsibility that truly helps the community.
\xa0
For her part, editor-in-chief Nanette Guadalquiver said the 7th anniversary of Sun.Star is an 201caffirmation and renewal of our commitment to our readers in Bacolod and Negros Occidental.201d\xa0
The reason why we exist is because of our readers 2014 in print, and online, she said.
"We have a lot to be thankful for despite the challenges.
This is also an exciting time because our island becomes a region 2014 there are more news to be written.
We are committed to inform and educate our readers.
We are always committed to deliver the truth and serve as watchdog of our society," she said.
Misa de Gallo starts today  , Misa de Gallo starts today  Rhealyn C.
Pojas, WHILE it bears an odd name for being called a night activity but is actually being held at dawn, to some it only means nine freezing mornings of commitment.

Who is not familiar with this nine-day devotion? 
Simbang Gabi to many, which is actually Misa de Gallo, is the nine-dawn masses the Catholics attend to count down Christmas.
It means mass of the rooster in Spanish, a practice that is centuries old.

San Pedro Cathedral Parish Secretary Leenard Baquial said in an interview with Sun.Star Davao that the reason why other people are calling it Simbang Gabi can be credited to the practice in Luzon where Catholic Churches actually schedule night masses.

Although the more obvious reason is that many mix this up with the Christmas midnight mass.
The idea of having the mass done in early morning dates back to the Spanish era was to let those who have work to do during daytime be able to continue their devotion every dawn.
According to Baquial, this practice is only done here in the Philippines.

As today marks the beginning of the Misa de Gallo, members of the Catholic Church are once again expected to fill up the Cathedrals and Churches in Davao City just like what happened last year where the San Pedro Cathedral was overflowing with devotees, that some massgoers had to stand outside the church just to attend the Holy Mass.

In response to last year2019s situation, the San Pedro Cathedral has made two schedules for the mass to be able to give solemnity and comfort to those who would go to the mass.
In the previous year, there was only one mass held for the Misa de Gallo which was every 4a.m.
but the church has scheduled an earlier mass at 3 a.m.
today.
     
While some believe that completing the nine mornings would mean answers to their wishes or prayers, Baquial said that the Church does not necessarily teach it, explaining further that it is in the believer2019s personal convictions and faith.
"They will lose nothing if they would believe it," Baquial said in the vernacular.

Josie Erie, a member of the Catholic Church who went to the San Pedro Cathedral on Tuesday said that for those like her who strives to complete the Misa de Gallo, the mass is very important because it is part of the celebration of Jesus Christ2019s birth and attending the mass would also make one feel the Christmas season even more.

Xmas spirit in songs, Xmas spirit in songsKarlo Paolo R.
Pates, CELEBRATING Christmas has been identified as the season of gift-giving and family reunions but the complete experience of the yuletide season won't be complete without listening to the loud Christmas songs composed by local artists played through speakers everywhere and jingles being sang on the streets by kids.
They say Christmas is also the season for all the kids--the time where kids asked for Christmas gifts from their Ninongs and Ninangs.
While some are contented by just listening to the Christmas songs popularized by Filipino artist Jose Mari Chan or Canadian singer Michael Buble, Filipino children often embody the Christmas spirit by singing Chistmas carols in the respective communities or to those motorists on the streets.
Back in the Middle Ages, a Christmas carol was sung originally in a circle in front of a crowd and celebrating it through the vibe of dancing.
Although caroling is still practiced in some parts of the country, there are those who admitted that the Christmas caroling tradition is already fading away.
But the Christmas caroling tradition is still alive up to now here in the Metro Davao.
Lumads from different provinces have arrived here in the city as part of their yearly traditional visit to celebrate Christmas here.
Some lumads are seen walking around the streets and singing Christmas songs to any random stranger they have encountered in exchange for cash donations which they use to purchase food.
Common songs regularly sang by these lumads who are particularly staying near Gaisano Mall of Davao and Buhangin Gym areas are those Christmas station IDs of ABS-CBN including Thank You For The Love, Ngayong Pasko Magniningning ang Pilipino, Bro Ikaw ang Star ng Pasko, not to mention the regular Christmas beats of Jingle Bells, We Wish You A Merry Christmas, among others.
I followed two carolers who identified themselves as Jasper Perez and Kyla Diaz, both seven years old residing in Lanang as they strolled along their neighborhood.
When asked what caroling means to them, both said this is not just about earning a few pesos but more about the Christmas tradition itself.
"Nasanay naman gud mi ani mangaroling kada Pasko.
Usahay naa pay muuban sa amo pero diri ra pud sa among mga silingan mangaroling ," Jasper said.
Kyla, for her part, said that she's just enjoying what they are doing as it2019s the season of happiness and gift-giving.
"Malingaw man pud gud mi bisan kanta-kanta ," Kyla said.
She added that seeing the happy faces of their neighbors while they are singing Christmas songs to them is already enough to make them feel happy.
Jasper said that celebrating Christmas is not about the gifts you receive but it's on how you make the season memorable and fun.
"Sa ako okay ra man na walay mga regalo basta completo mi pamilya ug wala mi problema, happy nako ana ," Jasper said.
For 21-year-old Christian believer Avon Sinajon, the practice of the Christmas caroling tradition is still important as it symbolizes the inter-generational legacy of Filipino culture on Christmas.
"Buhi pa gihapon ni na tradition ," Sinajon said.

The ANCAP safety rating, The ANCAP safety ratingTHE Australasian New Car Assessment Program  is Australasia's leading independent vehicle safety advocate.
ANCAP provides consumers with independent vehicle safety information through the publication of ANCAP safety ratings.
ANCAP safety ratings take into account the level of occupant and pedestrian protection provided by new cars through the conduct of physical crash tests and the assessment of collision avoidance technologies.
The more stars, the better the vehicle performed in ANCAP tests.
To achieve the maximum 5-star ANCAP safety rating, a vehicle must achieve the highest standards in all tests and feature advanced safety assist technologies.
Since 1992, ANCAP has published crash test results for a wide range of new passenger and light commercial vehicle makes, models and variants sold in Australia and New Zealand, including the all-new Mitsubishi Montero.
ANCAP is supported by all Australian and New Zealand motoring clubs, the Australian Government, the New Zealand Government, Australian state and territory governments, the Victorian Transport Accident Commission, NRMA Insurance and the FIA Foundation.
ANCAP buys and tests cars that are available to Australian and New Zealand consumers.
Car manufacturers can examine the test cars before and after tests, and view the tests and results.
ANCAP uses a range of internationally recognized crash tests, undertaken by independent specialist laboratories.
In each of the physical tests, dummies are used to scientifically measure the various forces on occupants in the crash.
The data gathered is then assessed in conjunction with a physical assessment of the vehicle, and a score determined for each test.
In addition, vehicles must be fitted with certain safety features and safety assist technologies.
These requirements are then assessed alongside the physical crash test scores with an overall score translated into an ANCAP safety rating of between 1 to 5 stars.
Among the comprehensive tests used by ANCAP are the Frontal offset test, Side impact test, Pole impact test, Pedestrian test, Whiplash test, safety assist technologies  assessment.
ANCAP scores out of a possible 37 points from these tests.
The higher the score and the greater the safety inclusions, the more stars.
Still serving on Xmas eve , Still serving on Xmas eve Kriztja Marae G.
Labrador, FOR Filipinos, celebrating Christmas eve always calls for a family gathering, eating Noche Buena together when the clock strikes at 12 midnight on the 25th of December, opening gifts, laughing and just having a good time.
But for some, this day will just be a regular working day in their own offices all in the name of serving others.
Just like young respiratory therapist Trixie May Guevara who will be spending her first Christmas away from her hometown in South Cotabato and spend it to where she is needed the most -- the hospital.
201cI feel sad because this will be the first time I am spending my Christmas away from home but at the same time quite curious and how it would be like spending it at the hospital,201d she said in vernacular.
More than the mixed emotions of sadness and curiosity, Guevara added that her motivation to work more than the monetary return during that day would always be that rewarding feeling of seeing her patients get well and helping in saving their lives.
Meanwhile, for San Pedro Police Station Homicide and Arson Section Investigator P03 Rizalito Clapiz III, missing Noche Buena on Christmas has become a normal yearly thing to him having done it for 10 years now.
201cFor 10 years now, I have been used to working on a Christmas day which is also my birthday, my family is also used to me not going home during that day,201d Clapiz said in vernacular.
He said that his family also understands that his responsibility as a Police Officer is great especially in keeping the peace and order during the holidays adding that there was one time he tried catching up on Noche Buena but unfortunately his family was already fast asleep when he arrived home.
201cFrom the day we took oath in working for the Police, we have accepted the fact that they own our time.
We work whenever they ask us to work which includes Christmas and New Year,201d he said.
201cThe reward we get from this is seeing people happy and safe in celebrating their Christmas Eve, the appreciation we get from them is enough inspiration for us to continue on,201d he added.
This Christmas eve, as we celebrate our Noche Buena with our loved ones, let us take time to appreciate and thank those who are not able to celebrate their Christmas with their loved ones all in the name of serving all of us.
From jeepney drivers to police personnel let us take time to thank those serving us on Christmas day.
Facebook adding 'Photo Magic' to Messenger application , Facebook adding 'Photo Magic' to Messenger application SAN FRANCISCO -- Facebook is trying to make it easier to send photos as the holiday season's picture-taking frenzy escalates with the arrival of Christmas and New Year's Eve.
The world's largest social networking service is offering a feature call "Photo Magic" that will automatically address a message so it can be sent quickly to Facebook friends identified in a picture.
The option relies on the same image-recognition technology that attaches people's names to Facebook posts.
With this twist, Facebook is deploying the technology in its Messenger application to make it more convenient to distribute pictures to a few friends and family members.
Facebook Inc.
will highlight Photo Magic in a Messenger update that will start rolling out Thursday to users of Apple's iPhones and smartphones running on Google's Android software.
It will still be up to each individual to decide whether they want to activate Photo Magic.
After the feature is turned on, it can still be switched off at any time.
The update is being distributed to a broad audience after a month of testing among smartphone users in Australia.
Facebook is planning to make Photo Magic available to Messenger users everywhere in the world except in Canada and the European Union.
Messenger currently has more than 700 million users, about half the size of the audience on Facebook's social network.
Facebook is counting on Photo Magic to foster more allegiance to its Messenger app as it competes against other competing services such as Snapchat that have become particularly popular among teenagers and young adults.
If Photo Magic is turned on, it is supposed to promptly figure out if any of the people in a picture belong to the smartphone owner's circle of Facebook friends.
If some are found, Photo Magic creates a messaging thread that allows a user to send the picture to all the identified parties with two clicks.
About 9.5 billion pictures are already sent through Messenger each month, according to Facebook.
The Menlo Park, California, company believes the volume will be even higher if Photo Magic's automation is successful in making it less of a hassle to pick out the images and figure out which people might be interested in seeing them.

OFW Christmas away from home , OFW Christmas away from home Ruji Peter S.
Abat, WE CALL them our new age heroes, the Overseas Filipino Workers  primarily due to the sacrifices they make to give their families back in the Philippines a better life.
This sacrifice is compounded when they celebrate Christmas Day away from home instead of spending it with their families.
Yet given this predicament, most OFWs find ways to keep themselves preoccupied in an attempt to brush off emptiness, homesickness, and other negative feelings associated with celebrating the Yuletide Season away from home.
For Micah Viernes, an OFW who has been working in Qatar for three years, the feeling of emptiness is always there.

But, she said, "I always try to stay positive.
So I whisper 'thank you' or 'Hamdullah'."
On Christmas Eve, she usually stays up all night and waits until the clock strikes midnight, when she grabs a few bottles of liquor and share it with her Filipino friends before calling it a night.
She then calls her family the following day since reaching them through phone calls is quite a hassle during the wee hours of the Christmas Eve celebration due to the poor telecom connections back home.
Viernes also spends her Christmas Day at the beach.
"Homesickness doesn't affect me much nowadays maybe because long rides going to the beach help me to think a little of what other useful things I can do here in Qatar rather than missing Pinas.
We try to go to the beach two or three times a week," she said.
She added that she recently joined a Filipino community there and she expects to have a festive celebration citing that the community is preparing for a big one this Christmas Day.
Emory Juansengpue, who is spending Christmas away from his for family for the first time after leaving for New Zealand earlier this year, said it's an exciting first for him.
"I have always thought it was really going to be depressing like what we commonly thought about, but actually, for a bachelor like myself, my first Christmas overseas is something that I'm looking forward to," Juansengpue said.
"Of course you would still think about Christmas back home.
But me and my Filipino friends here make the most of what we can to entertain ourselves and still have that 'Paskong Pinoy' feel into our celebrations.
One thing is certain though, we will miss Lechon Baboy this time around," he added.
As a student there and a part-time worker, Juansengpue said he makes the best out of the holidays since more Filipino there are called in to work more hours as some of the local employees there take their vacations.
When there's no work or classes, he then spends his time having meet-ups with his "kababayans" and they often tour around the city.
But he was quick to add that there has been a constant communication with his family back home hence, he doesn't get much of the bitter end of homesickness.
Jeff Von Catre, for his part, said he can't put into words what he had felt when he celebrated Christmas away from his family for the first time last year as he generally said that it was all bad when he spent it in Australia.
"I felt so jealous of my Filipino friends whose holiday leave applications were approved and got to see and spend the Christmas season with their families back home.
Despite of that, I just tried to be strong no matter what because at the end of the day, only my own self will help me survive away from home," Catre said.
He and his friends would often meet up and have drinking sprees while when alone, he usually spends most of his time on social networking sites to check on updates back home and keep in touch with his friends and family.

Catre is lucky this year because he gets to spend it in the Philippines.
Viernes, Juansengpue, Catre and perhaps any OFW would agree that in spending their holidays away from home, it's all for the greater cause as they have chosen to sacrifice their time to provide for their families here.
So for all their sacrifices, all we have for them are our thanks, praises and well wishes that they'd have a blast on Christmas Day.
Merry Christmas!
Masbad: Barebones Computers and Mobile OSes, Masbad: Barebones Computers and Mobile OSesRoark L.
Masbad, Wacky Tech, WOULDN'T it be great if you and I could bring around with us our own operating system? Wouldn't it be nice if we need not lug around our laptops? Wouldn't it be even better if the operating system is compatible with any hardware configuration out there? 
It sounds so utopian, doesn't it? 
I guess it is.

But with the kind of advancements we've already achieved, I don't think this is an impossibility.
I'd think more than the computing corporations in the world will look at this as a threat and so will move to make it hard for it to become reality.

But hear me out though.
Let's imagine this together.

So, the basic premise is that you have a large-capacity USB flash drive with you.
I imagine it to be no smaller than 256GB.
That's mid-range of most flash-drive based laptops in the market.
 That flash drive is where you install your operating system.
Once you have that operating system installed, you can just plug it into any laptop or desktop computer, boot from your flash drive and you're off.

Imagine the level of convenience for everyone.
You can say goodbye to bringing an additional bag with you to carry your laptop.

If you're a business organization, you can deploy company-issued flash drives with added layers of security.
On a personal level, you can borrow a friend's laptop without having to worry about whether you know their password or not.

Hardware side though, there will be a need to rethink how laptops and desktops will be made.
I think that for this to work, laptops and desktops will need to be storage-less.
Build-to-order systems would be the best way here.
Give the choice to the customer.
Hand to them the power to choose.

Going back a bit to the operating system.

I am, in fact, imagining an entirely new operating system.
A hybrid perhaps of what's already in the market.
The stability of OS X.
The freemiumness of Linux.
And Windows', ummmm, I'll get back to you on that.
I'm imagining an OS that's open and can easily recognize the hardware that it's using and adapt to it on the fly.
And if the OS can remember that hardware configuration for future use, it will be so much more useful.

I'm sure there are flows in there somewhere.
The idea is not perfect.
And if you start picking it apart, the imperfections will become more apparent.
But, the point here, really, is thinking out of the box.

Well, what do you think?
Christmas for PWDs , Christmas for PWDs Karina V.
Canedo, CHRISTMAS is a season of giving and a season of sharing, showing compassion and understanding especially the marginalized sector, including Persons with Disabilities or the PWDs.
Rather than the cliche of viewing them as someone begging on the streets and singing songs on sidewalks they too can still celebrate Christmas.

A PWD himself, Teogenes Bong Comiling, of the city's Persons with Disability Assistance Office  under the Davao City Social Services and Development Office  said that one of the things they look forward each year is the Pahalipay sa PWDs given by the City Government.
Comiling said that last December 7, many PWDs like him enjoyed the raffle of different gadgets such as cellphones, television, and electric kettle, among others.
The 1,500 PWD attendees, included the deaf, blind, children with down syndrome, crippled and those with other disabilities came.
"Wish namona mas daghan pa next year ," Comiling said.
He also hopes that Davao City Mayor Rodrigo Duterte will fulfil his word that he will bring PWDs to Malaca\xf1ang if he will win in May 2016.
He said that PWDs like him only conduct simple celebration.
"Me and my family go to church for simbanggabi and during the Christmas eve we have dinner and me and my kumpares also PWDs share some drink to enjoy the evening," Comiling said in vernacular.
He said that he only has one wish: "Wish nako na daghan PWDs na maabutan sa programa ni mayor, especially the gift checks ug uban pa kay daghan nalipay na mga pamilya, ug unta ang mga PWDs dili magkasakit ," Comiling said.
Meanwhile, another PWD, Helen Adorica, a city hall worker for 14 years and a proud mother of a cum laude graduate, said that she only wish that PWDs would know each other more.
"I hope they will have a good health, that we would know each other more and that more PWDs can have jobs as many have not finished school which also translates to no employment," she said.
Adorica said that she will also have a simple gathering and celebration this year with her family.
The story of Belinda , The story of Belinda Ace June Rell S.
Perez, For the poor, prostitution is an opportunity
, BELINDA, 23, , was then a minor when she was introduced into the world of prostitution.
"Matingala ko sa akong mga barkada kay naa silay kwarta.
Tapos pag manlaag mi, makalibre sila, mao akong nahuna-hunaan musabay na lang kaya ko sa ila aron makwarta ko, murag lingaw man gud ," said by a then innocent girl who at her young age at 15 unknowingly did things out of curiosity and poverty.

Belinda is now an active member of Talikala, a non-government organization combatting against human exploitation and human trafficking.

Belinda was among the 123 victims of human trafficking in Davao City since 2004 until the first half of this year, based on the Inter-Agency Council Against Trafficking  data.

But unlike any other girls, Belinda admitted that it was her choice to fall as prey by the predators of prostitution and human trafficking.

She was only 16-years-old when they were trafficked and brought to Mandaue City, Cebu as entertainers.
But she narrated that even as early as 15 she chose to live the life of her prostituted friends as "serbis girls" doing things beyond just to get through her daily living.

"My father died when I was only five years old, my mother was also left with no job, every day and every meal was a real struggle for us," Belinda said, adding that she was left with no choice but to take whatever opportunity there is around.

"I was only 15 years old then and considering my young age, I saw my friend2019s job as an opportunity with no clear understanding where I2019m heading to," she added.

After months of serving as instrument to "short happiness" for their "guest" or "customers" during late night by the sidewalks of Carpenter, Agdao, Davao City, where she was already contented with only P350 to P400 a night, Belinda with her friends were invited by their neighbor to be entertainers in Cebu.
201cOur neighbor told us that there is a greater opportunity that awaits us in Mandaue City, Cebu,201d she said.
Just like the thousands of victims in the country who were coerced and forced and controlled into the sex industry for tourists, Belinda was promised by their recruiter an attractive offer of better job.

"He said that those girls working there  already build their own houses and are now able to buy fancy things they wanted because of the job.
He also told us that we can go home here in Davao whenever we wanted," Belinda said, underscoring that they were promised to live in heaven but ended up in hell.

"Kami pud naingganyo mi sa iyang offer, wala pa man gud mi sa tarong na pang huna-huna kung unsa ang pwede mahitabo sa among desisyon, nisugotlang pud mi, ," she said, adding that she left without her mother2019s permission.

Belinda narrated that their life in the club is like living in a cage with restricted freedom and happiness.
"We were like prisoners, we can2019t go outside on our own," she said.

When in Cebu, as entertainers, they only get P800 out of P10,000 or only .08 percent of the payment made by the foreign customers.
"Mubawi na lang mi sa tip na ihatag sa customer, P800 before was already a big amount for us, so dili na lang mi moreklamo kay kung magyayaw mi, kasab-an mi sa bar owner ," she added.

After nearly four months of stay in the club as sexual exploits, Belinda and the rest of the trafficked women were rescued by Talikala.

But what made Belinda2019s story worse is that even with the intervention of the programs of Talikala against human trafficking, she still decided to go back to her work because of its stagnant economic situation.
Belinda admitted that even when they were organized by the NGO, she still chose to live again her miserable life as 201cserbis girl201d in Davao City.
201cI don2019t know with me before, I was just thinking that I was left with no choice but to go back to the dirty work because all I had in mind before was money, how can we eat, basically because of poverty, I feel hopeless that time,201d she said.

Jeanette I.
Ampog, chair of Talikala-Davao in a separate interview, said that poverty drives individual to enter such jobs and usually ended up being trafficked.

201cVictims were enticed and lured by these recruiters mainly because they are living in poverty, there is lack of job opportunity which caused them to resort to a risky move,201d she said.

201cHonestly, our battle against human trafficking is challenged by the fact that still even with the government and the private sector2019s interventions like the seminars, trainings there is still a big possibility that trafficked victims to be re-traffic if and only if nothing change in their economic situation.
They will still fall as prey to the predators,201d Ampog said.
Belinda, who used to devote her night hours in the sidewalks of Carpenter, Agdao, Davao City, and inside the club in Mandaue City, Cebu, is now an active member of Talikala, standing firm to fight against human trafficking in persons.

201cI dream that hopefully no more young girls will be trapped in the same situation where I was before, that is why I am working now in Talikala to give my share in our pursuit to a human-trafficking free city, country and even world,201d Belinda shared in vernacular.
Modern slavery , Modern slavery 
DAVAO.
Children members of the Children Against Child Trafficking group from Barangay 76-A in Davao City shows their placards in support to stop human trafficking during an event in line with the Human Trafficking Awareness Month from November 12 to December 12.

Kriztja Marae G.
Labrador, THERE are about 2.5 million victims of human trafficking around the world, according to the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime  "at any given period."
For new parent Kristine Cantila-Veeneman, human trafficking is modern slavery which both includes sexual exploitation and forced labor.
"It is a very sad truth that it still exists especially in the Philippines.
As a mother I could never imagine myself selling my daughter to traffickers for an 'x' amount of money.
Selling your daughter to traffickers is like ruining her life forever," Veeneman said.
Mother of two Lisly Mae Dorado, describes the issue as a "market-driven criminal industry that is based on the principles of supply and demand."
"It deeply pains me just to even imagine the innocent ones that are involved; those innocent ones that cannot defend themselves and are always the victims," Dorado said.
"Each child should not be the means for a family to survive in their daily needs.
That would be the role of the parents - to provide for the family and for their kids," she added.
True enough, UNODC defines human trafficking as "the act of forcefully transporting or recruiting persons for the purpose of exploitation."
Exploitation acts include prostitution, forced labor, slavery or removal of organs.
 Sad to say, not every citizen in this country is aware of these facts about trafficking.
Interagency Council Against Trafficking Davao Region Network  unit head and Department of Social Welfare and Development -Davao project development officer Alma Acera said that there is really a need to continue intensifying awareness up to the grassroots level.
She said that there are instances that even the victims themselves do not know that they are being trafficked.
"It  is as important as going to school, because if you are well informed you have that sense of self 2013protection because we cannot protect everybody.
So it is much better that individuals would be aware so that can make sound choices," Acera said.
With their intensive information dissemination campaign which started three years ago, Acera said they are due for assessment to see the impact that their campaign has done.
No change in modes
For the modes of trafficking, Acera said that nothing has really changed.
The modes for trafficking still include cellular phones, peer to peer or relatives to relatives and the Internet.
She said that they have currently validated illegal transaction patterns through these modes but still lack the capability to counter those especially the Internet.
"All houses now a day has internet connections and it is difficult to check residences without being accused of invading their privacy," she said.
Another factor that is keeping human trafficking alive, according to Acera, is poverty.
Without access to livelihood, parents will still continue to submit their children to force labor.
DSWD in 2012 had listed a total of 1,376 human trafficking victims in the country.
However, true numbers of the victims are likely higher as there are still unreported cases.
For Davao Region from January to October this year, DSWD had catered to 77 human trafficking survivors aging from 0 to 59 years old wherein 17 of them are male and 60 are female.
Programs
Just recently, Iacat XI, together with other Mindanao based non-government organizations, launched the counter-tipster project which aims to combat human trafficking through spreading awareness and monitoring in the barangay level.
Family Planning Organizations of the Philippines , Luna Legal Resource Center for Women and Children Inc., and Tambayan Center for Children's Rights Inc.
are the lead organizations of the project.
Counter-Tipster will focus on addressing the cases of trafficking in persons in General Santos, Davao del Sur, and Davao City.
The project is in partnership with USAID.
It will run for two years to give barangay officials in the target areas orientations and trainings for them to be able to create their own barangay programs to address human trafficking in their area.
Acera said that through strengthening the barangays' awareness they will be even more vigilant on assessing and monitoring trafficking activities in their area.
Iacat 11 is also targeting to present before the Davao City Council an Anti-Trafficking ordinance to enhance monitoring in all areas in the local level.
Experiencing the mini-Christmas village in Oro , Experiencing the mini-Christmas village in Oro 
CHRISTMAS VILLAGE 
Riain Alfonso, CHRISTMAS is definitely in the air at the La Victoria household at Gran Europa as it opens its doors once again to let the public in for the yearly miniature Christmas village exhibit.
 
As you enter the La Victoria gates, the owner, Roel Lavictoria, greets you with a warm smile and a firm handshake of welcome.
201cI am sharing this to the public, especially to the kids, because I know that what I have is one of a kind.
It is my personal collection and I2019ve been collecting these for the last 10 years,201d said Roel, whose eyes light up each time he mentions his collection.

He is a man so passionate about Christmas that he gets giddy with excitement each time the month of December rolls in.
It2019s probably safe to say that there won2019t be anybody else as passionate about the holidays except maybe for Santa Claus.

"When I was a child, I was always looking forward to Christmas.
Every time na mag put up akong mom ug Christmas decors, I would always be there.
I would help her decorate our house,201d shared Roel adding, 201cI always look forward to December 16 because that was when she would start decorating.201d 
From his own personal experience, he knew how much children love Christmas and this served as his inspiration for putting up the village and opening it up to anybody interested to see his collection.

The village took almost two months to assemble and definitely a labor of love.
201cIt needs a lot of creativity as far as organizing and harmonizing all the structures so that it would look like a real community, a replica of a village during winter.201d He added that he has a creative team to help him with the execution of his vision and that he also gets input from his wife and three daughters who support him all the way.
 
The village boasts of 264 buildings, houses, and other structures.
These include several log cabins, a town plaza complete with a town hall and a local hero2019s monument, a restaurant, a lake with a lighthouse and boardwalk, a twenty-five meter train track with a moving mini train, a huge carnival, and a forest.
 
Of course, no Christmas village is complete without the Santas; the village boasts of thirteen.
The pine trees are found everywhere, 256 in total, while what appears to be 2018snow2019 has blanketed the entire village.
The village also features its own eight-meter working gondola ski cable cars that lead up to the miniature mountain where you see tiny toy figures skiing.
The total 2018human2019 population of the village is 498 and the toy figures are arranged in a way that they depict actual life in a village.
The display even has 97 animals.
Roel has been opening his household to the public since 2004 when he first put up his Christmas village on display.
201cI started with a small table with only 10 houses.
As the years go on, I was able to collect more.201d  
The only time he did not stage his miniature village was in 2011 because of Typhoon Sendong.
As the number of items in his collection grew, so did the area required for the display.
He had to expand the size of their gazebo to accommodate the ever-growing collection.
  
The majority of the buildings in his collection were bought mostly in the US while the cable cars were a Christmas gift from his German foster daughter who stayed with the family for a year in 2014.
201cThese are things that are rare here in the country so every time I travel abroad, I make sure that I bring home at least two or three.201d
Putting up the village is no joke, said Roel.
He described how they placed LED lights underneath the fabric which serves as the ground or the base for the entire display.
In doing so, they are able to make the whiteness of the 2018snow2019 stand out.
Also, this is the first time that they have not used batteries on any of the things on display.
Meticulous work was done on the wiring system of the village as they had to convert many items on display from 110 to 220 volts.

Kids and adults alike are sure to be amazed by the detailed work done on the village.
Ingenuity was quite apparent in the creation of some of the other items including the bridges which are all made of popsicle sticks and had to be assembled painstakingly.
The village lamp posts, for example, are made out of balloon sticks with bulbs from old series lights inserted into the hole so that it would look like and have the feel of an actual lamp post.

In the past, the display is open to the public starting December 16, as was their tradition when Roel2019s mother was still alive.
This year, the family decided to start the public viewing last December 8.
201cThis time we opened earlier para naman maraming matuwa,201d Roel said.

From Mondays to Thursdays, the village can be viewed from 6:00 to 10:00 p.m., extending until 12:00 midnight on Fridays to Sundays.

201cBut if there are people coming from out of town, we extend until 1:00 a.m.,201d added Roel.

201cLike last time, there were people coming from Claveria who came to CdeO just to see the village.201d 
On average, 70 to about 100 people come nightly to the La Victoria household to check out the display.
201cAkong iyaan, kagahapon, dinhi man sila.
Gipa-anhi mi kay ang ang mga bata daw malingaw,201d said Rejane Ancog from Pagatpat who, along with her husband Diode, brought along their two kids aged six and two.
201cTsada kaayo siya, ma-feel jud nimo ang Christmas.
Nice kaayo kay makita jud sa akong mga kids unsa ang Pasko.201d
For those who would like to see this unique Christmas exhibit, the La Victoria house is located at Block 25, Lot 5 and 6, Barcelona Street, La Buena Vida Subdivision, Gran Europa.
The family allows the public to view the village for free.

201cSeeing the smiles of the kids are enough for me,201d Roel furthered, 201cI really believe that Christmas is for the kids.
It2019s more than money.
It2019s really rewarding seeing the smiles and how they enjoy looking at the village.201d
Jiangsu: Where it is made in China, Jiangsu: Where it is made in China
Jiangsu hosts one of China's 25 major coastal hub ports.
Nini B.
Cabaero, FOR products "made in China," most people would think Beijing, as it is the capital city.
But it is Jiangsu province, in the eastern coastal areas of the Chinese mainland, that has the largest economic output in China.
Jiangsu's location makes it strategic for manufacturing with its huge land area, links by high-speed rail, massive road networks, and airports; access to skilled personnel and rich historical and cultural heritage.
The province plays an important role in the Belt and Road Initiative as declared by Chinese President Xi Jinping in 2013 when he called for the promotion of external exchanges.
The Belt and Road Initiative is a combination of the Silk Road Economic Belt and the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road, both are programs aimed at opening up China through a trade and infrastructure network connecting Asia with Europe and Africa along the ancient trade routes.
The Philippines is part of the Belt and Road countries that would benefit from increased trade and exchange with the development of infrastructure interconnectivity, sea-and-rail and international air transport networks, and a modern telecommunications system.
Chen Zheng Ning, director in charge of the Belt and Road Initiative, told Asian journalists of Jiangsu's breakthroughs in infrastructure productivity and for being the no.
1 manufacturing province with a vibrant silk industry.
He cited also the initiative's plan to integrate the cultural aspect with the development of economy and trade.
Jiangsu made progress in developing an innovation-oriented economy after China opened up and instituted reforms in the late 1970s.
The province's gross domestic product  surpassed 6.5 trillion yuan  last year while its per capita GDP reached 81,874 yuan, ranking the top in the country.?It also ranked first in the Development and Life Index released by the National Bureau of Statistics that measures a region's eco-social development and people's livelihoods.
The Nanjing Port  Co.
Ltd.
in Jiangsu is one of China's 25 major coastal hub ports and a first-class national port to international regions and nations.
It connects the Yangtze River Delta region to provinces in China and to nearly 200 ports in more than 80 countries and regions.
The Sanpower Group, with its expertise in information service industries, financial investments, health care, and real estate development, has devoted itself to creating social wealth while contributing to the protection of wildlife.
Suning Commerce Group Co.
Ltd.
has built a network of brick-and-mortar stores across 600 cities in China and abroad and an e-commerce platform to embrace the concept of offline-to-online retail.
Its partnership with Alibaba.com brought in record sales during the Singles Day shopping holiday in China last November 11.
In another city, Xuzhou, a national development zone boasts of having the largest volume and the highest investment value.
It is home to Caterpillar, ThyssenKrupp, Saint-Gobain, Vestas, Doosan, Xuzhou Construction Machinery Group, GCL from Hong Kong and Powerchip from Taiwan.

Lianyungang city, on the coast in East China's Jiangsu province, is an important hub of the Eurasian continental bridge and a well-known seaport in China.
It highlights economic development and a high-tech industrial development zone, combined with famous and impressive tourist sites like the Kongwang Mountain.
Suzhou city in the southeast part of China's Jiangsu province is closest to Shanghai is also known as Land of Fish and Rice, Garden Capital, Silk Capital and an Arts and Crafts City.?It is home to the Hengtong group that is into fiber communication, electricity and power grids, online operations, and real estate industries; and the Wujiang Dingsheng Silk Co.
Ltd., located in the Shengze township, a center for silk production in China.
Jiangsu is a vibrant and complex province that enjoys a pivotal role in the opening up of China to other parts of Asia and Europe, without undervaluing its cultural and historical footprints in the country's fast-paced development.

Anti-Trafficking Laws: Are they addressing the problem?, Anti-Trafficking Laws: Are they addressing the problem?Christine Joice C.
Cudis, SINCE the issue on human trafficking in the Philippines has landed on the headlines, there were a lot of laws and regulations that were proposed and amended by the government.
 Women's groups and non-government organizations also participate in the call to combat human trafficking here.

But with all of these combined, why do we still see this matter as a thorny problem?
Having been instituted in May 2003, Republic Act No.
9208 or the Anti-Trafficking in Persons Act made the country the first in the Asean to legislate such law.
But quoting the assessment of the US State Department in the Philippines on 2013, "As both a source country and, to a lesser extent, a destination and transit country for sex trafficking and forced labor, the Philippines remained at Tier 2 on the state department's three-tier ranking system.
Despite making significant efforts to combat trafficking, the Philippines does not yet fully comply with the minimum standards for  elimination."
In the 2015 Trafficking in Persons Report of the same department, the Philippines once again was placed in Tier 2 on its three-tier ranking system.
 
Being rank in Tier 2, it means that those are the countries whose governments do not fully comply with the minimum standards set by the Trafficking Victims Protection Act .
The report said the Philippine government implements anti-trafficking laws, but the judicial system2019s performance remains weak, with excessively long trials and few public prosecutors focusing on cases, made worse by multi-level prevalence of corruption.

According to Talikala executive director, Jeanette Ampog, "What I want  to be captured are those who are the owners of those prostitution houses."
Although for the past years, there has been a rise of convicted people due to vilation on anti-human trafficking law, those were just the middle men in the crime.

The operators or those who are responsible for the existence of these form of labor are still out there.
Ampog added that although the Department of Social Welfare and Development  provides financial assistance on the trafficking victims, "P10,000, I believe is not the answer to this problem.
Awareness more than ever is what the people needs."
"Poverty stands as the major reason behind this activity.
Even if we have provided a few bucks to inspire the victims to change their paths, still it is not enough.
When they realize that their money are gone, they go back to their old lifestyle because their financial status has not really changed and providing these service is their only solution," Ampog added.
Traffickers on the other hand, practice it for the simple fact that the business brings them a huge amount of money without getting their hands dirty and minds stressed.
 
The only thing they have to do is to take the risk of being caught  and to become a little less of a human by thinking that they could do these injustices to other people.
                                                     
Protecting women, kids, Protecting women, kidsKarlo Paolo R.
Pates, PROTECTING the welfare of all women, including their children has been the responsibility of the state and other concerned agencies.
 Both women and children are protected in the Constitution as well as Republic Act  10364, otherwise known as "Expanded Anti-Trafficking in Persons Act of 2012."
Stated under the policy that the state will give the highest priority to the enactment of measures and development of programs that will promote human dignity, protect the people from any threat of violence and exploitation, among others.
Human trafficking has also been a significant issue not only in Davao City but in the whole country as well.

The most emerging problem concerning the issue of human trafficking is that common victims of acts including sexual exploitation, sexual slavery, and prostitution are minors.
This was the information reflected on the data furnished by the Davao City Police Office  to Sun.Star Davao.

Eighteen of 19 victims of trafficking in persons were rescued by the Women's and Children's Protection Desk  of DCPO from January to November are minors.

DCPO spokesperson Chief Inspector Milgrace Cajes Driz said that trafficking of persons refers to the recruitment, transportation of persons without the victim's consent or knowledge by means of force or threat for the purpose of exploitation.
Driz said that acts which include forced labor, slavery, involuntary servitude, sex tourism, debt bondage, and pornography are the means that determine whether an act is a form of trafficking in persons.
"Diri sa Davao City ang mga common na mga biktima na atong narescue kay mga babae ug mga minors ," Driz told Sun.Star Davao in an interview at her office recently.

Cases of sexual exploitation and prostitution are the frequent cases of the rescued victims, Driz said.
 
The Inter-Agency Council against Trafficking  in Davao Region also released a data, showing that human trafficking in the region still involves sex particularly for the young girls.
 A total of 123 victims were recorded by Iacat where 68 were female minors, 44 female adults, eight male minors, and three were male adults.

Driz said that the trafficking victims engaged in these activities due to poverty and the worst, these victims are being trafficked with the consent of their relatives or direct family members.

"Tungod gayud kay pobre ning mga biktima.
Nangihinganlan ug kwarta ," Driz said.

She also admitted the reason behind why most of the minors rescued in human trafficking cases here in Davao City are due to their vulnerability and weaknesses.
 
The average age of the rescued victims are 8 years-old to 15 years-old, Driz said.
Driz said that majority of the perpetrators arrested for trafficking were foreign nationals.
It can be recalled that an American national allegedly involved in trafficking of male minors was arrested by authorities in Davao City last August.
Village watchmen of Barangay 74-A and members of Talomo police arrested the American national identified as George William Nolana, a resident of Morales Village in Barangay 74-A, Davao City.
He was also accused of sexually abusing eight minors.
The eight minors , were rescued by personnel from the Department of Social Welfare and Development  and City Social Services and Development Office .

The village watchmen reprimanded the eight minors after they were still on the streets as part of their Oplan Sita campaign in line with the celebration of the Kadayawan Festival.
The eight minors were endorsed to the Talomo police station for questioning, wherein they claimed to have been sexually abused by the suspect.
 
The victims were given food ang money and in exchange for sexual abuse.

After the arrest of foreign nationals tagged in series of human trafficking cases, authorities are now closely monitoring some of them particularly those are now residing in the city.
"Majority of the suspects are pedophile that's why their victims are minors.
They have money and they can easily encourage the parents of some minors to engage in these acts," Driz said in the vernacular.
As for the forced labor, the DCPO has yet to record or encounter a case on it but they have intensified their intelligence monitoring especially in the bus terminals, seaports, and airports where the victims are being exited.
Personnel from the Anti-Illegal Trafficking in Persons are based and deployed in those areas where the victims who are promised for work abroad or in some areas are being transported.
All 19 victims of trafficking in the city were endorsed to personnel from both the Department of Social Welfare and Development  and City Social Services and Development Office  for debriefing, psychological assistance and other assistance before they are turned over back to their respective families.
 
Cybercrime
With the advent of technology where cybercrimes are now possible, agencies such as National Bureau of Investigation  and the Criminal Investigation and Detection Group  have the capacity to monitor acts like cyber-pornography.

Cyber-pornography in several dating sites as well as recruitment agencies not registered under Philippine Overseas Employment Administration  are some of the cybercrimes monitored in the internet.
"The amount of money is huge that's why it's very tempting for those who are in need.
They are promised for a job abroad but when they arrived in the promised work, they are forced to perform sexual activities," Driz said.

Responsibility of parents
She also reiterated to the parents of their crucial roles they need to portray in order to prevent their children from being victimized by the criminal minds in these acts.
"Their relationship with their kids are crucial as well as their guidance on what wrong and correct.
If these kids are properly oriented then there are just small chances of them being victimized by the advantageous criminals," she added.
 The money should not be the deciding factor for them to let their children to engage in selling of flesh, Driz said.
 
Lisly Mae Callino-Dorado, one of the concerned parents, said that she's also afraid that similar cases might happen to her children.
"This is for me a very sensitive issue and it deeply pains me just to even imagine the innocent ones that are involved; those innocent ones that cannot defend themselves and are always the victims," Dorado said in a Facebook chat with Sun.Star Davao.
Dorado also scored on some irresponsible parents who directly sell their children in exchange for money.
"For parents that leads their own child to be victims of such cruelty, that's just absurd and very irresponsible.
I hope they will suffer the same as what their kids are suffering and die in a very painful death.
I know I2019m ranting, but I just can2019t help it," Dorado said.
 
She added, "Each child should not be the means for a family to survive in their daily needs.
That would be the role of the parents which is to provide for the family and for their kids.
So I would say this trafficking act of mothers/parents - that is plain selfishness and indolence." 
Christmas in the eyes of a child, Christmas in the eyes of a childAce June Rell S.
Perez, I REMEMBER when I was a child that I used to confine myself inside a room and cry out load for not owning the gift I want for Christmas.
A decade after, I came to realize that I am indeed more than blessed to experience Christmas in its most wonderful and spectacular essence when I was a kid together with family and close kin.

I feel bad for myself after hearing those little wishes  coming from the little voices of children on the streets and care centers.
Because when I was at their age, I never even thought to include those in my wish list.

When I was strolling along the sidewalks of Balusong, Matina, Davao City in an early afternoon, I happened to talk with a nine-year old girl, Princess "Tintin" Lopez.

She intently oversees their Christmas lanterns being sold on the sidewalk while his father took a quick rest during siesta time.

While most of the children fell asleep or playing with their neighbors during siesta this Holiday vacation, Princess chose to help his father in selling Christmas lanterns as her way of helping her family to have a good Noche Buena to share with this Christmas.
"Tabang-tabang sa ko kay Papa karon sa pagpamaligya og mga lanterns, wala bitaw klase mao niingon ko sa iya naapil ko og bantay " she said.
She said that she used to help his father in selling Christmas lanterns since he was seven years old.
201cIt2019s fine for me, it is my way of fulfilling my wish this Christmas, to have a delicious Noche Buena,201d she said in vernacular.

From Sidewalks to the Center
It was a year ago when I visited the Archdiocesan Nourishment Center  located on Pagasa Street in Davao City.
I had the same feeling except that more children are visiting during meal times the center.
ANC is established with an aim to provide integral nourishment programs and services such as spiritual formation, medical assistance especially to the poorest of the poor.
From a nearly hundred children in the center during Monday lunch, I pulled an eight years old Donard Enriquez from his table after knowing that he was finished eating his meal.

When asked what his Christmas wish, I was so touched by his response saying that his only wish is to be with her father again.
"Nag abroad man daw to akong papa wala pa ko kabalo kanus-a siya mobalik kay wala naman gud siya nagtawag, gimingaw nako sa iya,201d the eight-year old child shared his longing to his Overseas Filipino Worker  in Dubai.

Donard shared that his family is barely able to eat three times a day now since her mother is also left with no job thus his constant visit in ANC during breakfast and lunch.
They said Christmas is for Children, I seconded.
Now, that I am years away when I was stupidly boxing myself in a room and crying out load for not owning the gift, material gift I want for Christmas, my only wish for this year is to make those little wishes of these little hopeful children, like Donard and Princess to be realized and come true.
A glimpse of Christmas   , A glimpse of Christmas   Christine Joice C.
Cudis, TO MOST cities in the Philippines, Christmas season means decorative lights filling the night sky and firecrackers making all the noise.
Here in Davao, it is total silence and a huge wave of indigenous people  in the streets singing and dancing to the beat of their festive music.
 
For many years now, IPs from the hinterlands of the city and neighboring provinces of Davao del Norte, Cotabato, and Bukidnon have made it sort of their tradition to visit the poblacion every December to ask for Christmas gifts.
 
This year, their number has reached more than 25,000 according to the records provided by the City Social Services and Development Office .
 
Hence, the eight temporary shelter areas allocated for them by City Mayor Rodrigo Duterte looks like overflowing basins and the water has not stopped flowing yet.
  
The one in Buhangin, if you happen to pass by during the wee hours or late at night has a lot of occupants.
Some have just resorted to stay at the parking areas of establishments near the gym, introducing themselves to the risk of being ran over by vehicles as the road is one of the busiest in the city.
 
Now this is where our curiosity comes in.
Why do they still go down from their villages if they know they will live like this?  
According to CSSDO assistant chair Liwayway Caligdong, "They simply don't mind.
Wala lang yan sa kanila.
Tayo lang ang nababahala pero okay lang pala talaga yan sa kanila."  
They are so used to very poor accommodation, they don2019t have any qualms about whatever sleeping arrangement is available.
 
Sun.Star editor-in-chief Stella Estremera, who has been exposed to scenarios like these throughout the years of writing articles about lumads also added up, saying, "Doon sa kanilang community sa papag lang sila natutulog, lupa na agad ang sahig." They are used to poverty, but that does not mean they deserve ridicule as this 20-something woman did while visiting one of the sites Tuesday.

"Pagbantay kay ang imohang cellphone, dalira kaayo kuhaon ,201d she said while covering her nose with a cloth.
Somebody has clearly forgotten that the lumads are here to enjoy the generosity of the Dabawenyos.
Their hair may not be as shiny as a city girl but their hearts are among the gentlest.
 
The problem is some have started to interpret the name "lumad" as synonymous to the word "poor".
For indeed, thousands of lumads are financially-challenged.

There2019s a difference, however, from the lumads coming down to see how it is in the city during Christmas and the beggars.
A very thin line may separate their financial capacity, but the spirit by which they accept is far different for this is not about survival, this is about getting a glimpse of a different world.

"Ganahan mi makadawat ug bugas.
Mais ug kamote ra man gud pirmi among kan-on didto sa bukid.
," 18-year-old Risa said.

If we think about it, they are just like some of us who dream of visiting Paris or London in the future.
So let us treat them the way we want to be treated by the French and British when we visit their cities and of course, do not forget to make them feel the spirit of this holiday which are sharing and loving.
Merry Christmas! 
It2019s never easy   , It2019s never easy   Karina V.
Canedo, CINDY, 23, a volunteer at Lawig Bubai, an organization under Talikala, was once a victim of trafficking.

In an interview with Sun.Star Davao she said that before she was trafficked, she can be considered a woman in prostitution while she was in Davao.

When she was brought to Cebu, she did not realize that she was already being trafficked.
They were brought to a Casa and made to work there for four months.
Luckily, they were rescued, filed cases and won against the perpetrators.

Sadly, when asked what happened next, Cindy only said that no assistance was given to them from the government.

201cWala, gidawat lang mi, walay livelihood programs na gihatag sa amoa ,201d Cindy said.
 She also added that the government assistance extended to them, was only minimal.
 
201cKadto lang pag-uban sa amoa didto sa Cebu, ang pamasahe came from International Justice Mission ,201d Cindy said.

Cindy2019s case was won before the RA 9208 was amended to become RA 1078 or the 201cExpanded Anti-Trafficking in Person2019s Act of 2012 which mandated different agencies to create an Interagency Council Against Trafficking .

Her situation paints a picture of what the victims may undergo, and leads us to ask as to where really the basic services of government, and non-government reaches its limits in their intervention and help the victims of human trafficking.
 
The Department of Social Welfare and Development is currently the secretariat of the council which is made up of other agencies including Department of Justice , Department of Interior and Local Government , Department of Labor and Employment , Overseas Workers Welfare Administration, National Bureau of Investigation , Philippine National Police , Non-Government Organizations , and Civil Society Organizations  and Local Government Unit  DSWD-11 project development officer Alma Acera said that their office provide various programs directly given for the victim survivors.
 
201cWe provide protection, rescue, temporary shelter, psychosocial intervention, therapy, processing and medical needs,201d Acera said.
She also added that their agency also provide financial assistance for entrepreneurial activities, and to augment the family income of those who are rescued.

201cApart from that, we also provide Balik Probinsya transportation assistance, and financial assistance for the transportation of witnesses once there are filed cases in the court,201d Acera said.

As poverty is among the major causes of the cases of Trafficking in Persons, greater financial assistance is what the clients seek and Acera admitted that these past years only a small budget has been allotted for financial support for the victims.

201cTen thousand pesos worth of livelihood assistance were given to them.
Not all of them can avail of it because it also depends on the assessment.
Also, not everyone wants to enter into livelihood, so it will really takes a long process),201d Acera said.

She said that the victims are assessed on sustainable livelihood program thru 201cHanda ka na bang magnegosyo201d.

When a victim fails the assessment, they will be recommended for skills training entitling them to P7,500 financial support.
This could be through DSWD or through the Technical Education Skills Development Authority .

Acera also said that since most of the identified victims are minors, they also offer educational assistance, and they also provide financial assistance for processing documents in aid of those who seek jobs and refer them to employment agencies and establishments.

201cFor many years, there2019s only a minimum budget that is allocated to be given directly to the client.
It is only worth P280,000 and this is what is divided for one year but next year we expect it to increase next year because of our request for its increase has been approved),201d Acera said.
 
She said that those cases they have catered were only those who are given financial support but also those who availed their other forms of services and intervention.

201cParehas anang five-year-old dili nimo na tagaan ug kwarta kay ang mas need niya kay ang ma-shelter siya ,201d Acera added.

Acera said that from January to October there are a total of 77 recorded victim survivor of human trafficking for this year, and last year there are 129 cases was also recorded.
Locally in Davao, in the Davao City Police Office, they have recorded a total of 19 cases from January to October, and 18 out of 19 cases are minors.

City Social Services and Development Office Quick Response Team for Children's Concerns Office-in-charge, Minda Silvano said that within their scope as network of the IACAT, they are in close coordination with the DCPO in terms of rescuing victims, they are a team, one cannot rescue without the other especially on children.

The CSSDO in partner with DSWD provides psychosocial interventions and also have shelters where the victims can temporarily stay.
Silvano said that within Davao, victims especially girls when preparing for their case are housed in Sidlakan and Balay Dangupan.

Aside from them other NGOs such as Tambayan, Global Impact, Luna Resource Center, Saligan Mindanao for legal assistance, Talikala for shelter, Mindanao Migrants are also active in helping especially when it comes to women and children.

She said that observably, they give more lengthy intervention to girls especially the fact that they also need values reorientation and they also provide in house education for those who stay more than six months to one year.

Other than that, Silvano said that they also rescue boys, and surprisingly they come in different areas Indigenous peoples and even Moros.

201cAmong these children we rescued were involved in drugs, sexual exploitation, pornography, forced labor.
Illegal adoption and organ trafficking,201d Silvano said adding that they have victim as young as two years old.

She said that they provide temporary shelter for those who cannot go back to their families for some reasons, but those who are capacitated enough, especially rescued adults are properly endorsed in their local social workers for monitoring and assistance.

Silvano said that their programs for anti-trafficking though already set and has many supporters there is still need to strengthen it more.
201cI-strengthen pa jud.
We will not limit our efforts because the numbers of the victims are growing,201d Silvano said.
She said that advocacy programs especially under Iacat are now garnering more boost, as they also tap private sectors to cooperate especially for the human trafficking campaign paraphernalia.
She also said that human trafficking is still tackled within the CSSDO district offices that penetrate to the barangays to give inputs to the people.
This month of November, they conducted video making contests to support their advocacy.

Meanwhile, despite these efforts of the government agencies to strengthen the campaign, rescue and assistance, individual participation is also encouraged to bear good results on anti-trafficking.

As Cindy, while she said she have not felt the government2019s intervention and dissatisfied with it, she did not limit herself and became the intervention herself to her peers, women involved in prostitution.
For years she had been organizing women in prostitution and conduct seminars for them not to be lured away to human trafficking.

201cTung na-rescue ko, nagpasalamat jud ko sa tanang nagtabang sa akoa, na feel nako na empowered ko kay nakabalo ko na naa diay kay rights, and nakatuon ko na dili na siguro magpa-traffic.
Nahimo kong volunteer karon kay bisan paman nahulog ko sa kahimtang sa prostitusyon dili ko gusto na ang akong ma-experience before, ma-experience pud sa akong ka peers ,201d Cindy said adding that among others, the women in prostitution are very vulnerable to human trafficking.

As of the moment, Cindy said that she is living by donations she received from visitors who came to see them in the center.

When asked if she still resort to prostitution to support her needs, she said only sometimes.
Awareness, a must , Awareness, a must Rhealyn C.
Pojas, TRAFFICKERS are wily in thinking up ways to trap a potential victim.
This means, persons at risk have to be wiser.
While there are law enforcers and other government agencies working together to put an end to human trafficking incidence, it is still hampered by the lack of awareness of the masses regarding the issue.
 
Department of Social Welfare and Development-11 Project Development Officer 3 Alma Acera told Sun.Star Davao in an interview that three years of intensive campaign done by the Inter-Agency Council Against Trafficking  in Davao Region could not suffice if the people in the area are not even aware that they have already fallen prey to traffickers.
  
Although the government agencies are disseminating information for public to know or spot suspicious activities which will potentially led them to trafficking incidents, there is still a greater need to inform the public regarding the issue.
 
201cPipila lang ang mga law enforcers nga naga-lihok kung i-compare nimo sa total population sa area ,201d Acera said adding that they cannot protect everybody because they outnumbered by the number of people to be protected.
 
201cIf the people are well-informed they can have self-protection and prevention which is important because through it, they will be able to make sound choices,201d Acera explained further.
    
Trafficker2019s Modus Operandi People should always be suspicious of people offering them jobs abroad or outside their towns that sound too good to be true.
 
Financial difficulties push people to be victims.
Acera said that employment abroad is most enticing to Filipinos in dire straits, thus, take stock.
Are the offers too good for one2019s educational background or skills? Are there freebies? Traffickers are glib of tongue and offer a lot, like free fare and processing of documents, even a cash advance.

Even legal recruiters have to be held in doubt, especially when the applicant is referred to another if he or she fails to pass legal screening.
 
The IACAT Davao advised the public to not easily believe any of these offers because it could be a trap.
If the process is legal then it is expected that one would spend money for the proceedings but if it is illegal it is even you who would be offered the money.

If the offers are too good to believe, report to the nearest barangay office, police station, DSWD, municipal office and other government agencies.

National Bureau of Investigation-11 Special Investigator Elias Leano Jr.
also told Sun.Star Davao in a separate interview that the people should also watch out for any falsification or alteration made by the illegal recruiters in their documents as that is a clear indication of trafficking.

201cThere are traffickers who would target to victimize minors and they would often used as an alibi the reason that they do not know that the victims are under aged every time they would be arrested,201d Leano said.

Leano also pointed out that people should be vigilant and must examine if ever the recruiter is trying to fake or forge their documents such as birth certificates and others that our often used as requirements for an employment as this is one of the signs of trafficking.

One can determine traffickers through this: victims are given the money in exchange for a promise job in another place or country to entice potential victims into pursuing it, Leano said.

201cPeople should carefully examine why they are being offered material wealth by their recruiters,201d Leano added.
 
Prevention
There must be a strong collaboration with the barangay officials because it is the first level and has a direct contact with the people.
If they spotted or noticed factors of trafficking then they should feed that information to the law enforcers and agencies such as the NBI, PNP and others so that data can be validated through investigation, Leano urged.

If the factors and elements of trafficking are found to be present in their investigations then they would file appropriate charges against the culprits and rescue the victims especially the minors.

Since it is the minors who are often trafficked, Leano also advised the parents to have a strict monitoring on their children2019s whereabouts and if the minor has no parents, the DSWD can take care of them.
201cBasically, it starts in the family so parents should be responsible enough in guiding their children,201d Leano uttered.

Since most traffic victims are exploited in their quest to find a job, Leano said that the government must give them a job.

Poverty in the country pushed them to pursue whatever jobs they encounter in their desperation to provide for their own and their family2019s needs and that is why they are victimized whenever they are offered employment or money in any forms of trafficking.

DSWD2019S Project Development Officer 3 Acera pointed out that above all, education is very important that is why the youth must be able to go to school because if they are well-informed they will be able to make sound decisions or choices which will protect them from being victimized.

If authorities work with people who are well aware and informed in the issue, then it would be easier to minimize trafficking incidents which might even lead to a point of extinction.

Pinoy in Rome: Christmas in the Year of Mercy, Pinoy in Rome: Christmas in the Year of Mercy
Photo by Robert Cortez
Robert Z.
Cortes, IN THE run-up towards Christmas -- last night in particular -- I felt impelled, for some reason, to return to Santa Maria in Monticelli.
This church was one of the shrines I featured in an article I wrote some weeks back to help me and my friends prepare for the opening of the Year of Mercy.
Since the church was just some five minutes away, walking from my house, I thought it would be a good idea to say the rosary in a shrine of Our Lady, to accompany her, as it were, on her journey to Bethlehem.
But, as with many of my plans, this one ended up being modified by Providence -- and, as always, to my advantage.

There was a pleasant surprise waiting for me inside the church.
It was the Blessed Sacrament exposed in a monstrance, in the middle of the altar.
The rest of the church was dimly lit, and the only bright light was in the front focusing on Our Lord.
There was a heightened sense of the solemn in that moment, but it was not only because of the dramatic ambiance, which included a solitary white-haired man praying the rosary on his knees.
Above all, it was because I had not expected the exposition to be there at all.
I felt I was waited upon, and by Whom! 
After 30 minutes of accompanying Our Lord, I then went to the side chapel to carry out my original intention of praying the rosary.
The chapel is dedicated to the Crucifix, handed down from the 14th century, and is a venerated image.
St.
Bridget of Sweden, whose church is just nearby, is known to have prayed before this Crucifix on many occasions.
Our Lady on the altar is the Madonna in Monticelli.
It used to be on the high altar, apparently, but has been replaced by a painting of the Presentation of Our Lady.
She is venerated here as Our Lady, Help of Christians.
As I knelt down, I saw an exhortation posted on top of the kneeler, written in Italian, which I found very touching.
It said: "Before this beautiful image of the Madonna, invoked as Help of Christians, stop for a moment and pray through the title to which, in moments of persecution, Christians have turned to Our Lady: entrust to Her your family, your sick loved ones, and suffering humanity."
The last phrase moved me, as I remembered my family abroad, my sick friends and relatives -- especially those who have personally asked me for prayers -- and the migrants who are suffering a very cold and difficult winter, many times rejected by those who should be welcoming them.
I felt that amidst my incapability of giving everyone a material Christmas present, this was the best I could do.
Many times, in fact, our prayers are the best gifts we can possibly give.
So I put them all there with all the strength of soul I could muster, not relying on my memory, which has long become poor, but on my desire, which is still gigantic.
I looked at the obviously very ancient Cross many times, already pierced in many parts with bukbok, and marveled at the fact that I had now become part of the long line of men and women in history who have found solace before it.
I was pleased to discover, as I looked at the dome above, that the angels painted on it were each holding something connected to the Passion: the Pillar of the Flagellation, the Cloth with the Holy Face, the Shroud, and Our Lord's Robe.
But I mostly looked at the image of Our Lady and the Child, and for many reasons.
First, because it was much nearer.
Then, because the figures were ravishingly beautiful: their reddish cheeks, their soft looking skin, their beautiful crowns, and the very delicate lace below our Lady's neck.

I remembered something I learned in art history class: that the red dress of Our Lady represented her humanity, and her blue cloak represented how she had been made royalty; the white tunic of Our Lord represented his purity.
Above all, the picture reminded me of Christmas: and not only because of the Mother and Child, but because the hearts they were holding -- amazingly painted as red, soft and tender things -- reminded me of those winter Christmas cherries you see on the Christmas tree.

How nice it would be, I thought, if we decorated the Christmas tree of our lives this Christmas season with a tender and soft heart for those who need it most from us.
That red, soft, and tender thing would be the constant glow lighting our living tree.
Christmas is always one of the best seasons for giving ourselves in meek and humble service to others, especially those closest to us, but even more so in this Jubilee Year of Mercy.
In our own little way, we would then be like Our Lord who came as Child for the purpose of waiting upon us, of serving us and has been waiting upon us and for us for centuries in the Blessed Sacrament.
This genuine disposition of being Christ to others is arguably the best one we can have this Christmas.
With it we can more sincerely and more meaningfully greet each and every one "Merry Christmas!"

Children's wish list , Children's wish list 
Children Christmas wishes
Marianne L.
Saberon-Abalayan, FROM world peace to toys, children aged two years old to 15 share their Christmas wishes.

Time with loved-ones who are across the miles and just having the family complete were also among mentioned.
It is interesting to note that while toys top the the list of these children's wish list, others do care about spending Christmas with the people they love and care about.
This writer asked children what their Christmas wish is and why.
Here's their replies:
Samantha Mei Teo, Grade 2, Ateneo de Davao University - I wish I could spend time with my cousins who are in New Zealand because I want to play with them this Christmas;
Iloi Sean Enerio, 10, Grade 5 SDA Elem School - I wish for mommy to be here so we can be a complete family this Christmas;
Jasper Rex Lim, 12, Grade 6, Ateneo de Davao University - IO Hawk hoverboard, coolest gadget for me;
Karshena Roque, Grade 6, Holy Child College of Davao - My wish is to be with my family and to celebrate the birthday of Jesus;
Julia Fe Angelica M.
Oreta, five, kindergarten, Ateneo - I wish I have a Lalaloopsy stretchy hair and Cayla dolls because I still don't have them yet; 
Shiloh Eunice Roque, eight, Grade 3, Amabe - I wish to have a new cellphone so that I can always communicate with my Mama and Papa after my class.
My second wish is for our barangay na maayos ang road para hindi na magbaha kung mag-ulan;
Sean Nicolas S.
Abalayan, nine, Grade 3, Abba's Child Science School Foundation - roller blades para matuto ako paano laruin;
Paul Gabriel G.
Caparas, 15, Holy Child College of Davao - Money so I can buy anything I like;
Jose Rafael P.
Go, 15, Precious International School of Davao - I wish for world peace so there will be no more wars and we all live in peace and love;
Coleen Venice P.
Casilan, 10, - I wish for a body pillow to keep me company while I sleep;
Josh Miguel L.
labrador, four years old - To be good parawalanang mag bad;
Yoshiki Michaela M.
Lucero, four years old - Barbie toys and watch para happy;
James Harvey Lucero, five years old, Risen Savior School in Mintal - transformer toys, new house;
Zion Andrei F.
Felix, four years old, nursery, Davao Christian High School - I wish for friends of Lamborghini, to have its other colors;
William Karl C.
Andres 10, Grade 5, Holy Child Colloge of Davao Mintal - rubiks cube because mine was already broken and mp3 because I love to listen to music;
Ayen Jennyl C.
Bajador, eight, Grade 3, Davao Goshen School - tab because I love to play with it;
Chromwel Ced, nine, Grade 3, Maa Christian Learning Center -  I wish to have a bike so I can be physically fit;
Mitch and Iriss Ced, 14 and 12, Grade 9 and Grade 7, Brokenshire Science High School - We wish to have Rubiks cube to enhance our skills in problem solving;
Tim Ced, Grade 5, MCLC - I wish to live in New Zealand to experience life there;
Christine Jane B.
Mercado, nine, Grade 3, Catalunan Grande Elementary School - sketch/drawing book so I can draw different things;
Danica Jane B.
Mercado, 14, Grade 8, Jesus J.
Soriano National High School - backpack/school bag so that when my old school bag is broken I can use the new one;
Deborah Joy Ang, six, Grade 1, Saint Francis Xavier Learning Center - to have a kitchen set toy because I want to cook;
Zaque U.
Bautista - I want bicycle and basketball because I love adventure;
Rennil Beniga, seven - I wish to have a bow and arrow like an archer because I want to play target.
Children are indeed simple.
Their Christmas wishes are not as complex and mundane as that of most adults.
They also know what they really wish for and they have reasons to back it up.
Have a merry Christmas everyone!
Statement of Cebu Citizens-Press Council on the death of Letty Jimenez-Magsanoc, Statement of Cebu Citizens-Press Council on the death of Letty Jimenez-MagsanocDec.
26, 2015
Letty Jimenez-Magsanoc was more than the editor-in-chief of a prestigious national newspaper.
To community journalists particularly, she embodied the ideals of journalism they could aspire for: her newsroom leadership, her courage in resisting repression in the dark days of martial law, and her passion and creativity in steering the "Inquirer" to its enviable place in the industry.
She knew her power to set the agenda, which Washington Post publisher Katharine Graham says is deciding what to print and what not to print, but she used it fearlessly and responsibly for what she believed was for public good.
Pachico A.
Seares
Executive Director, CCPC 
In their hands: People empowered to protect and provide, In their hands: People empowered to protect and provide
Bantay Kalikasan  members of Barangay San Miguel in Arakan Valley help prepare lunch for the BK meeting being held at their new office building.

Stella A.
Estremera, "ANG sa una, grabe man gud ang bisyo.
Inom.
Karon, naa pa pero pang-relax na lang ,201d said Mary Joy Tumanding, a resident of barangay Tumanding in Arakan Valley in North Cotabato province, one of five barangays surrounding Mt.
Sinaka, the town2019s main source of water.
What2019s here now that wasn2019t there before? Why did people change? 
201cWe used to just plant corn and bananas, now we also have rubber and cacao and fruit trees,201d she said in the vernacular.

Didn2019t you have access to rubber, cacao, and fruit seedlings before? 
201cWe had.
Those given by Fr.
Pops .
Many just died.201d Why didn2019t it prosper before? 201cThe women were busy with farm work.
Our menfolk were always drinking.201d You2019re still farming now, why aren2019t the men no longer drinking much? 201cOur men now tend the farm.201d 
What made the difference? 
201cBefore, the seedlings were just given to us, we were not taught what to do with it.
We didn2019t even know that cacao had to be planted at a certain distance from each other.
Now, I was even able to join a Farmer Field School  where I learned about budding.201d It took much longer than that to squeeze out what made the difference in the lives of members of Bantay Kalikasan before and now beyond what members and leaders from five barangays where BK has been established to protect Mt.
Sinaka six years ago are saying as 201cbetter than before201d.

But her final reply was eye-opening as it spelled the difference between giving and helping.
Tumanding is a prevalently Manobo-Tingananon village.
The four other barangays organized under Bantay Kalikasan 2013 Datu Ladayon, San Miguel, Salasang, and Lanao Kuran 2013 are predominantly Visayan settlers and some Tedurays who were brought to the area by the strife in other North Cotabato towns.

BK was initiated by Kinaiyahan Foundation Inc.
 in 2009 in partnership with Arakan2019s municipal environment and natural resources office  and municipal agriculture office  to mobilize the communities surrounding Mt.
Sinaka to protect it.

With residents harnessed to conduct inventories of the existing trees, planting of indigenous species on the mountain and its foothills, and maintaining nurseries for fruits and forest trees, slash and burn farming and illegal cutting of trees and shrubs on Mt.
Sinaka has been reduced to the barest minimum.
Even former slash-and-burn farmers have joined BK after realizing the importance of protecting the environment for sustained farm production and access to potable water.

Rita Panisa, a BK member of barangay Salasang, admits that before BK, the people were not mindful of the importance of the trees to their water sources and the sustainability of their livelihood and kaingin was a very common practice in farming.

201cKung makita ang kahoy mutubo, sigurado na kung naay sundang, putol gyud na ,201d she said in describing how rampant slash-and-burn farming was.
Born in Salasang, she never went up Mt.
Sinaka, until she joined the inventory and tree planting activities of BK.

Jonathan Tumanding of Barangay Tumanding, on the other hand, recalls how selling round lumber was their livelihood in his elementary years.
201cI would go with my father  and we2019d cut trees, make these into planks, and deliver these to wherever there are buyers,201d he said.

201cGagmay ra ang mag-uma kaniadto, tinuig ang uma .201d Joel Llegue, also of Tumanding, said that the forest was still lush during those times and so the people never gave much value to the trees.
That was then.
Logging operations and the slash and burn farming practices that followed have threatened Mt.
Sinaka.

It was in the 1990s when the people around Mt.
Sinaka, with the support of the local government, stood up against logging in their last bid to save whatever has been left.

It is from the success of this movement where BK stepped in and flourished.
To encourage participation, BKs were made beneficiaries of livelihood projects like duck, goat, hog, and chicken raising, and lately of livestock like cows and carabaos.

Each BK has thought up of its own system of distributing the benefits of these projects.
Like propagating the hogs and distributing these to each member who in turn will propagate his/hers as the BK maintains a high-quality boar.
The same goes for the livestock.

In barangay San Miguel, BK leader Bienvenido Ranario said they already have a total of ten cows with just one male, 24 goats that they were able to distribute to their members with two more females on the way, 67 chickens, and five ducks.
They are also cultivating organic bananas.
 The members are now also starting to harvest cacao and enjoying its high demand and gate price.
 
Protection and livelihood have thus sustained each other.
With livelihood as enticement, members are enjoying the fruits of their labor because of sustainable agriculture practices.
People are also made to understand how the environment works such that falcate and gmelina trees are not planted on areas around the water sources since these trees are for harvesting.
Trees planted around springs are the hardwood species.

Since then, BKs in the five barangays have been given priority in both environment and agriculture projects of Arakan.
201cIt2019s a priority of the local government because the concept of community involvement is very appropriate and we are able to revive our forests,201d Arakan Mayor Rene Rubino said.
Aside from the farm animals they distribute, the BK members are also prioritized in the National Greening Program where they get to provide the seedlings and are also tapped to do the planting, thus they earn outside of their regular farm income.

Recalling how they started the movement to protect the environment against logging in the 1990s, Rubino said, that they were not just focusing on the advocacy but were also ensuring that the people benefitted from their participation in order to imbibe the value of the environment toward sustainable development.
201cIn Arakan, environmental protection succeeded because it was given importance by the LGU,201d he added.

MAO Edgar V.
Arana however insists that what they have given the people is not even equivalent to what the people have contributed in saving Mt.
Sinaka.

201cMga livelihood, taphaw ra 2018na ,201d he said, 201cbecause the greater benefit is reaped by government which is the one tasked to protect the forest.201d 201cThe livelihood projects we have given does not even approximate the benefits the people were getting from the forests,201d he added.

From the forests, they harvested rattan, abaca, logs, and hunted game.

But all these have to stop because there is the need to protect Arakan2019s water source for today and the future generations.
At the outskirts of barangay Tumanding, Genaro Tumanding is building a new house, still of wood and bamboo, but approximately four times bigger than the regular houses of Manobos in the area.

He attributes his newly acquired wealth to the agriculture techniques he learned through BK.
He2019s now harvesting cacao, he said, and earns more than P3,000 a month from this alone.

His coffee trees are now starting to bear fruit and he looks forward to harvesting these as well on top of his bananas and vegetables and other fruits that thrive in his diversified farm lot.

201cOg madato ko, di gyud ta mo makalimtan ,201d Genaro, who once used to eke out a living hunting in the forest, told the KFI staff.
Top 10 Events That Shape 2015 , Top 10 Events That Shape 2015 Third Anne Peralta-Malonzo, Keith A.Calayag, FROM Pope Francis2019 historic visit, Mamasapano massacre to the Philippines2019 third crown in the prestigious Miss Universe pageant, Filipinos became witnesses to various events in 2015 that will be remembered for years to come.
Pope Francis charms the Philippines 
It2019s not every day that you get to see the leader of the world2019s one billion Catholics in person.
 That is why for five days in January , Filipinos from all walks of life trooped to several areas in Manila and Tacloban to get a glimpse and feel the presence of charismatic Pope Francis.
He met with priests, nuns, young people and celebrated mass at the Quirino Grandstand that drew a record crowd of six million despite the stormy weather, breaking a 1995 record when five million attended a similar event led by now Saint John Paul II in the same venue.
The highlight of the pontiff2019s visit, however, was his meeting with survivors of Super Typhoon Yolanda  which killed thousands of people and destroyed communities and livelihood in November 2013.
Francis2019 message of compassion and hope earned praises and some were even moved to tears.

 Mamasapano massacre 
Just as the Aquino government was making strides in bringing lasting peace in Mindanao, a monkey wrench was thrown into the clockwork and set back most of what it have planned to do.

On January 25, 44 members of the Philippine National Police Special Action Force were killed in an encounter with Muslim rebels and armed groups while on a mission to hunt terror suspects Abdul Basit Usman and Zulkifli Bin Hir also known as Marwan.
 
Twenty-three other people died because of the bungled operation, which brought jarring political consequences such as all-time low in the popularity ratings of President Benigno Aquino III and the stalled passage of the draft Bangsamoro Basic Law in Congress.
While Aquino assured that those responsible for the bloody incident would be held to account, he also called on Congress to hasten the passage of the proposed BBL, which was aimed at ending decades of armed conflict in Mindanao through the establishment of a political entity that will replace the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao.
Aquino remained hopeful that the measure will be passed before he steps down from power in June 2016.
 2018Tanim-bala2019 modus 
Air travelers got worried in the last three months of 2015 when news came out that some passengers were victimized by airport personnel who plant bullets in their luggage.
Various groups condemned the scam as unsuspecting individuals, including overseas Filipino workers, were forced to pay thousands of pesos in bribes under threat of lawsuit.
One of them is Gloria Ortinez, who had been working in Hong Kong for about 30 years.

Her return to Hong Kong was stalled when she became a victim of 2018tanim-bala2019 at the Ninoy Aquino International Airport.
 
Ortinez was eventually acquitted by the Pasay City Prosecutor2019s Office but upon return to Hong Kong, she found out that her employer has terminated her despite a communication from the Philippine Overseas Labor Office requesting the employer to give OFW Ortinez time and consideration to return to Hong Kong.

The National Bureau of Investigation later on confirmed the presence of such modus, which is reportedly not a handiwork of a syndicate.
201cThe NBI cannot establish that.
In these incidents, only certain people are involved,201d said Justice Undersecretary and spokesman Emmanuel Caparas in a press briefing on December 10.
Six airport personnel were also charged for the bullet-planting incidents, two from the Transportation Security  and four from the police Aviation Security Group .
 Manila scores in sea dispute with Beijing 
Malaca\xf1ang and nationalists lauded last October the ruling of the United Nations Arbitral Tribunal admitting jurisdiction over the case between the Philippines and China on the disputed territory in the West Philippine Sea.
This was despite Beijing objections that the arbitration body has no authority to hear the case brought up by Manila.
While the UN tribunal acknowledged its jurisdiction over the Philippine case against China, however, it did not include in its ruling the merits of the case as this would be subject of further hearing.
The Philippines believes it has a strong case because did not ask the tribunal to rule on maritime boundaries delimitation and the issue isn2019t about territorial sovereignty.
Instead, the Philippines is asking the tribunal to invalidate China's nine-dash line that covers 90 percent of the entire West Philippine Sea , as well as confirm the environmental degradation caused by Beijing's massive reclamation.
The Philippines is hoping that the process will be completed before the Aquino administration steps down in June 2016.
Mary Jane Veloso2019s last-minute reprieve from firing squad 
Just as her family and the nation were preparing for the worst, Filipina drug convict Mary Jane Veloso was saved from firing squad with just a few minutes to spare on wee hours of April 29.
Amid appeals from various groups and personalities including President Benigno Aquino III and world boxing champion Manny Pacquiao, Indonesia issued a reprieve at the eleventh hour as Veloso was given a chance to prove that she was a victim of drug trafficking.
Hours before the reprieve, Veloso2019s alleged recruiters Ma.
Cristina Sergio and live-in partner Julius Lacanilao surrendered to police although both still denied involvement in the 30-year-old2019s case.
In November, Indonesia announced that it had suspended the death penalty, which benefits Veloso and others, because the government wants to focus on improving Southeast Asia2019s largest economy.
Veloso was arrested in Yogyakarta airport in 2010 after authorities found 2.6 kilograms of heroin in a suitcase supposedly given by her Filipino companion who recruited her for a job as a domestic worker.
Pacquiao bows to Mayweather in 2018Fight of the Century2019 
After months of anticipation, eight-division world boxing champion Manny Pacquiao and prized American fighter Floyd Mayweather Jr.
squared off with the latter emerging as winner before a sell-out crowd at a Las Vegas hotel on May 2.
Pacquiao's camp revealed that he had sustained an undisclosed injury to his right shoulder while training, and while it had healed in time for the fight, he re-injured it in the fourth round.
Critics said that the injury contributed to his defeat.
Still, the bout earned criticisms as some had been disappointed in Mayweather's defense-oriented strategy and Pacquaio's difficulty in landing punches.
This had led to some critics and media outlets to describe the multi-million dollar bout as a complete waste of time and the 201chype of the century.201d
Pacquiao, 37, will return to the ring on April 9, 2016, just a month before he will be judged by voters if he is worthy to be promoted from congressman to senator.
The lawmaker will be facing a familiar foe: Timothy Bradley.
Pacquiao is expected to earn at least $20 million from the fight with Bradley, whom he defeated for the WBO welterweight title in April 2014.
Bradley won in their first meeting in June 2012 but observers had Pacquiao winning convincingly.

 US Marine convicted for killing transgender Jennifer Laude 
Over a year after he was charged with murder over the death of Filipino transgender Jeffrey 201cJennifer201d Laude, Lance Corporal Joseph Scott Pemberton was found guilty of homicide instead of murder as demanded by the victim2019s family.
He was sentenced to six up to 12 years of imprisonment by the Olongapo Regional Trial Court.
On the evening of October 11, 2014, Laude2019s body was found inside the bathroom of one of the rooms in Celzone Lodge in Olongapo City where she checked in with Pemberton after meeting at a nearby bar.
Pemberton admitted choking Laude after having found that she was biologically female but said he did not have the intention to kill her.

The solder said that she was still alive when he left her in the shower, not at the edge of the toilet bowl where police responders reportedly found her.
On December 1, the court delivered its verdict and said the killing of Laude was downgraded to homicide as it did not meet the standards for murder.

Aside from imprisonment, Pemberton was ordered to pay fine worth P4.5 million to Laude2019s family for civil indemnities, loss of earning capacity as Laude stood as the breadwinner of her family, for burial and funeral expenses and for moral and exemplary damages.
The court also ordered the transfer of Pemberton from his temporary detention in Camp Aguinaldo to the New Bilibid Prison in Muntinlupa City but Pemberton2019s legal counsel immediately appealed.
The court then allowed him to remain in the military camp but under the custody of the Bureau of Corrections.
 Search for next Palace occupant begins 
Vice President Jejomar Binay, Senators Grace Poe and Miriam Defensor Santiago, former Local Government chief Manuel Roxas II, and Davao City Mayor Rodrigo Duterte all have their eyes set on the May 2016 elections2019 biggest prize: the presidency.
While they could not officially campaign until February 2016, these personalities are already facing various issues, legal or otherwise, that test their viability as candidates.
Binay is hobbled by corruption allegations while Poe needs a final ruling from the Supreme Court whether she has met the residency and citizenship requirements for presidential candidates.
Santiago2019s admission that she licked late stage lung cancer still raised apprehensions while Roxas2019 performance as Cabinet member has been touted as sub-par.

Born with a silver spoon, Roxas was also branded by his opponents as elitist in a country where a quarter of the population is considered poor.

Duterte, meanwhile, has been criticized for his dictatorial tendencies and alleged lack of respect for human rights when he admitted that he had already killed 1,700 suspected criminals in Davao City.
 Philippines hosts Apec Summit for second time 
The whole country on November 18 to 19 witnessed the coming of over 11,000 delegates from all over the world in Manila for the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation  Economic Leaders' Meeting.
United States President Barack Obama, Chinese President Xi Jinping, Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe and social media darlings Mexican leader Enrique Pe\xf1a Nieto and Canadian premier Justin Trudeau took part in the summit which the Philippines hosted for the first time since 1996.

Apec 2015 was held amid simmering tensions between Philippines and China due to territorial disputes in the West Philippines Sea.
However, the Philippines decided to put aside the issue temporarily to focus on the summit's objective: promotion of trade, investment and inclusive growth, which is needed to defeat poverty in Apec member countries.
The summit was also held just days after the November 13 Paris attacks which left 137 people dead, forcing the country to enforce strict security and road closures near summit venues and hotels in Metro Manila that caused heavy traffic and inconvenience to commuters and motorists.
Normally, trade and economic issues are discussed at the Apec meeting.
But following the Paris attacks, the world leaders welcomed efforts to fight terrorism.
They called for continued individual and collective actions, as well as sharing of best practices, in securing infrastructure, travel, supply chains, and financial systems from acts of terrorism.
New economic strategies were also discussed: Building inclusive economies, fostering the participation of micro, small and medium enterprises, building sustainable and resilient communities and enhancing the regional economic integration agenda.
In summary, President Benigno Aquino III said the main challenge for the economic leaders is to find a way to sustain and strengthen quality growth, particularly by considering policy responses that promote inclusivity, while addressing the current domestic and external challenges to Apec countries' growth.
 Third Miss Universe crown for Philippines 
It was a victory 42 years in the making with a dramatic plot twist in the end.
Philippines2019 bet Pia Wurtzbach beat out 79 other ladies around the world to secure the country2019s third Miss Universe crown after Gloria Diaz and Margie Moran, who won the title in 1969 and 1973, respectively.
Wurtzbach's victory though was shrouded with controversy when pageant host Steve Harvey mistakenly announced her as first runner-up to Ariadna Gutierrez of Colombia.
Harvey immediately corrected the mix-up and awarded the crown to Wurtzbach.
Gutierrez was named first runner-up and Olivia Jordan of the United States placed second runner-up to complete the top three.
Celebrity judges Perez Hilton and Niecy Nash also vouched for Miss Philippines2019 victory, saying the four-man judges2019 panel gave a unanimous vote for Wurtzbach.

Prior to joining beauty contests, Wurtzbach, 26, was a professional model, actress, host, chef, beauty writer, stylist, and make-up artist.
She competed in the Binibining Pilipinas pageant in 2013 and 2014 but failed to win the title of Miss Universe-Philippines.
Wurtzbach, however, was not discouraged as she joined for the third time in 2015 and eventually bagged the title of Miss Universe-Philippines, which allowed her to represent the country in the competition held on December 20 in Las Vegas, Nevada.

Masbad: Top 3 apps for your 2016 travel, Masbad: Top 3 apps for your 2016 travelRoark L.
Masbad, Wacky Tech, HAPPY new year everyone! I trust that all your digits are all accounted for and that you had an awesome New Year's Eve countdown.
Oh, and let's not forget the media noche.
Hopefully, that was as filling as the year that was.

I'll make this a quick for everybody.

I've been told that this year will be a good year to travel.
In fact, my girlfriend is telling me that we should be going on a trip soon.
Perhaps twice this year.
Surely, there will be a bonanza of destinations to pick from.
The Philippines alone has tons to offer.
Whether you prefer to go up the mountain or swim in the sea, you won't easily run out of options.
From Aparri to Jolo, there's some place to go to and marvel at.

But wherever you may be headed to, I'd like to recommend three kinds of apps to make sure that you have in your smartphones.

Photography
I think this will be the one kind of app that you must have.
Sure, there's the stock camera app of your chosen smartphone but it won't hurt really you have something that offers more.
Moreso if you're into photography and are craving for a bit more control.

My recommendation is to get Camera+ .

PS.
I'd like to add here Snapseed  as a photo editing app to accompany your camera app.

Flights and planes
In most likelihood, you'll be travelling by plane.
There are apps out there that allow you to track airplanes and monitor flights whether they're on time or not.
I cannot stress this enough that knowing when your plane is landing so you can board or knowing the status of your flight is very helpful.

My recommendation here is Flightradar24 .

Maps
This is a no-brainer.
When you're out there on a foreign place, knowing where you are and where to go saves you time and energy.
And for the navigationally-challenged, this, will hopefully, help you out too.

My recommendation here is Google Maps .

So there you have it! 
May your 2016 be filled with travels and adventures and the photos that come out of it!
Cheers!
Agri tech: A sometimes forgotten basic , Agri tech: A sometimes forgotten basic 
Photo by Stella A.
Estremera
Stella A.
Estremera, THE farm lot that now teems with various crops and fruit trees used to host only corn, a farmer in baragnay San Miguel, Arakan Valley in North Cotabato said.
"Mais ra man gayud ang uma sa una ," he said.
Since the local government unit partnered with Kinaiyahan Foundation Inc.
 in 2009, however, diversified farming has been introduced with the town's municipal agriculture officer  Edgar Aranas taking the lead in making sure that the residents of five barangays surrounding Mt.
Sinaka in their town organized under the Bantay Kalikasan  are provided livelihood assistance and learn agriculture technology that can ensure sustainable development.
BK was organized to protect Mt.
Sinaka, the major water source of the municipality and a critical habitat of the endangered Philippine Eagle.

But to ensure that the residents are up and about to guard the mountain from poachers and slash-and-burn farmers, the municipal government had to ensure that the residents are enjoying a good harvest and have sustainable livelihood away from the forests of Sinaka.
"Dagko kayo ang challenge ka yang unang makalaban, dili man ang mga dagko kay wala na man sila diha.
Ang naa diha, mga pobre ," Aranas said.
"We were introducing technologies that go against what the ordinary people have been doing as a means of survival," he added.
The residents of barangays Datu Ladayon, San Miguel, Salasang, Tumanding, and Datu Kuran  used to eke out a living through kaingin , hunting, gathering of rattan, and small-scale logging on Mt.
Sinaka.
This means, Aranas said, by enforcing the law to keep people out of Mt.
Sinaka, they were depriving people of their means of livelihood.
That is the very reason why the LGU has made sure that members of BK are given priority for any agricultural and environment protection projects.
"It's like we dislocated them from their means of survival," Aranas said, admitting that what the LGU has been giving since BK was organized in 2009 is but a small portion of the benefits the residents were getting from the mountain before that.
"The livelihood projects we have been giving out has not yet come at par with the earnings the people got from Mt.
Sinaka before," he said.
To maximize the benefits of what the LGU is giving out, agricultural technology comes in as a major component.

Thus, from just tending to corn plots, residents now know crop diversification that mix what they call the "durable" crops  and the vegetables, root crops, and other farm produce that are harvested seasonally.
Alberto Apas, a farmer and BK member of San Miguel, expressed gratitude for the learnings he got as a farmer, which for so long, he was never aware of.
"Ang BK nagtudlo og diversified farming.
Dako kayo ang kausaban sa amoang kahimtang ," he said.
"Pinaagi sa training, na-develop ang pagsabot," BK-San Miguel chair Bienvenido Ranario Jr.
said.
"Napalawom ang pagsabot sa mga miyembro na dili lang sa mananom ta, pero nganong mananom ta ."
As reported in last Sunday's cover story about these same people, Mary Joy Tumanding of barangay Tumanding admitted that while they were given cacao, coffee, and rubber seedlings before BK came to be, they were never taught how to plant these.
As a result, the seedlings failed to provide for them a lush harvest.
Today, BK members are not only planting permanent or cash crops  like cacao and coffee and fruit trees, they are also planting harvestable trees like falcata and gmelina.
But it is clear to all members that these harvestable trees can only be planted in their farmlands, on the foothills of Mt.
Sinaka, but never around water sources.
The reason: these will be harvested in a few years and being fast-growing trees, these species also use up a lot of water.
The trees planted on Mt.
Sinaka and most especially around identified water sources are the indigenous hardwood species.
Having a full understanding of how crops and the environment interact with each other, after six years, residents are now enjoying the huge demand for cacao and coffee beans.
The seedlings they planted six years ago are now producing the beans that are providing for them a better livelihood.
It's a wonder that it took so long for rural folks to be reached by farm technologies that require not much but their daily attention and concern, which includes concern for where the water they are getting to nourish themselves and their farms come from.
But as is often said, better late than never, and we are all the better for it: the farmers, the environment, and us the people.
Inglay's kitchen  , Inglay's kitchen  Maria Elena Catajan, LA TRINIDAD Benguet - When Inglay Capuyan-Fokno first opened her
restaurant, locals would take off their shoes when they entered.
The act, although a laughable anecdote today is indicative of the culture of respect and humility highland folk have to which the restaurant pays homage to serving food in its traditional proportions, using native ingredients and making its interiors a reflection of highland culture.

Inglay herself said it took a while for the locals to get comfortable with the ambiance of the place, it being, one of the first resto in the Valley to offer a table clothed, clean, prim and proper eating place.
"They were shy to come in, thinking it was too formal and expensive," relates Capuyan-Fokno.
 
On the onset, Inglay served alcoholic drinks in the resto, but was dissuaded by the number of drunks who spent the night drinking the night away, as well as holes cigarettes wrecked on her pristine white table cloth.

When the resto first opened in 1997, Dangwa and Benguet State University employees were its frequent visitors, families would have their special occasions in the resto or come for a meal, in the time when there was no Department of Tourism accreditation, Inglay was already tourism friendly, with its ambiance, menu and staff giving the public an alternative restaurant in the Valley.

Today there is a new menu for the establishment, deciding the old food fare has become too common, the family collaborated with their in house chef and is proud to present the revitalized menu.

The Inglay Mongolian buffet is now open for lunch and dinner with the usual vegetables, meat, sauces and spices but what makes the buffet special is the freshness of the produce which is sourced from the personal rooftop garden of Inglay herself.

The Mongolian buffet also boasts to be the lone resto to offer rice wine in its choices of sauces to mix into your chosen bowl, of course, with the help of the Chef Celso Ocampo, if you need advice on how to make full use of the highland wine, now used for cooking.

A new drink defines the innovation the menu has with the refreshing torogito iced tea, made from local rice wine, lemons and sugar.
The drink is surprisingly refreshing, making you smile, especially if you know what tapuey tastes like.

The family collaboration came up with a menu that is personal, combining the choicest family recipes and tried and tested Inglay signature dishes.

Restaurant signature pinikpikan as well as the etag sinigang is still in the fray.
Added in the menu are soy honey pork chops, beef terriyaki, BBQ pork ribs and Inglays quarter chicken.

Pasta innovations include the etaglaise, the family's version of bolognaise, sandwich choices have roast pork, chicken and tuna.

Inglay's memory soup, which is a hearty mix of red beans, etag , and flour dumplings, its described to invoke memories of home, prodding you to remember good soup taken on a rainy day.

Breakfast choices include full hearty meals inspired by true life patrons of the resto labeled as the trader, energizer, climber and highlander which include favorite's like tapa, longanissa, pan de sal and corned beef.

Salads are named after Ingaly's daughter, Massinay, which is a twist on the waldorf, the Weight Watchers choice, the Cordilleras and Inglay's favorite, all of which are eternally personal, giving you a glimpse of what Inglay's family is made of.

Inglay's daughter, Katrina, recently added a pastry shop within the resto, taking care of the sweet after meal treats you may find in her quaint space.
Breads, pastries and desserts may be ordered as well.

As Inglay's tradition of food preparation has evolved with time, passing on her tradition to her children and servicing the Valley community with good food, prepared and presented in the best way possible.

Before Inglay opened her full restaurant, a small hole in the wall was set up carinderia style, serving Inglay2019s signature dishes, today, what we see at Inglay's is a testament of a woman's persistence knows no bounds.
Festival foodfest to feature Ilonggo foods , Festival foodfest to feature Ilonggo foods Lydia C.
Pendon, THE Iloilo Hotel, Restaurant and Resort Association  will feature the best of Ilonggo foods during the four-day Dinagyang IHRRA Food Festival from January 21 to 24 along with its traditional site in Delgado Street beside the Amigo Terrace Hotel.

Happy Abenir of IHRRA said around 35 members of the association are ready to present the best Ilonggo cuisine and other Filipino dishes to the Dinagyang revelers.

The association is a partner of the Iloilo Dinagyang Foundation in presenting the best of Iloilo City during the famous Dinagyang Festival.
Abenir said the open site is their old food festival place every year since the Dinagyang started some 48 years ago.

IHRRA was able to convert a portion of Delgado St.
into a family area with festival atmosphere during the nightly food trip.
Abenir said that San Miguel Corp.
will provide the nightly live band music in a stage at the end of strip.

All food fair participants compose of restaurants, eateries and hotels will have to decorate their stalls and vie for prizes as they present their best Filipino food at reasonable prices.
 
Twitter appears ready to expand beyond 140-character tweets, Twitter appears ready to expand beyond 140-character tweets
Twitter co-founder and Chairman Jack Dorsey speaks at a campaign fundraiser for Democratic Candidate for Public Advocate Reshma Saujani, in New York.

SAN FRANCISCO -- Twitter appears ready to loosen its decade-old restriction on the length of messages in a bid to make its service more appealing to a wider audience accustomed to the greater freedom offered by Facebook and other forums.
CEO and co-founder Jack Dorsey telegraphed Twitter's intentions in a tweet posted Tuesday after the technology news site Re/Code reported the company is exploring increasing its limits on text from 140 characters to as many as 10,000.
Dorsey didn't directly address the Re/Code report that cited unnamed people, but he made it clear that Twitter isn't wedded to the 140 character limit.
He illustrated his point by posting a screenshot of a text consisting of 1,325 characters.
If Twitter were to allow tweets to span 10,000 characters, it could produce 1,700-word dissertations, based on the size of Dorsey's extended post.
San Francisco-based Twitter Inc.
declined to comment on its plans.
In his message, Dorsey wrote that Twitter has already noticed that many of its roughly 300 million users already have been including screenshots of lengthy texts in their tweets.
He indicated Twitter is examining ways to give people more room to express themselves without polluting the service with gasbags.
Imposing some restraint "inspires creativity and brevity.
And a sense of speed.
We will never lose that feeling," Dorsey pledged.
At the same time, Dorsey said Twitter isn't "going to be shy about building more utility and power into Twitter for people.
As long as it's consistent with what people want to do, we're going to explore it."
Analysts said Dorsey is probably trying to avoid a backlash among long-time Twitter users who consider the 140-character tweeting limit sacred.
At the same time, he needs to respond to company shareholders pining for a bigger audience that would generate more advertising revenue.
More revenue eventually could help Twitter turn a profit for the first time in its history.
Twitter can't afford "to become stagnant, they need to get bigger if they want to build a more relevant advertising platform," said Topeka Capital Markets analyst Blake Harper.
After a long streak of robust growth that turned it into one of the Internet's hottest companies, Twitter's growth has slowed dramatically during the past year-and-half to leave it scrambling to catch up with social networking leader Facebook and its 1.5 billion users.
Twitter's malaise resulted in the departure of Dick Costolo as the company's CEO last July and ushered in the return of Dorsey, who had been ousted as the company's leader in 2008.
The pressure has been building on Dorsey to take drastic measures to accelerate user growth as Twitter's stock has sunk further below its November 2013 initial public offering price of $26.
The shares shed 64 cents Tuesday to close at $21.92, a decline of nearly 40 percent from where they stood from when Dorsey became CEO last summer.
Dorsey helped invent Twitter in 2006 and imposed a 140-character limit on messages so the service would be easy to use on cellphones that had 160-character limits on texts at that time.
Those texting limits on phones faded away several years ago as the advent of smartphones enabled people to use other Internet messaging services, making Twitter's restrictions look increasingly antiquated.
Wedbush Securities analyst Michael Pachter believes an increased limit on tweets would be a "good, baby step" to attracting more users to Twitter and believes it could be done without alienating the service's current audience.
One way to make an increased limit less obnoxious would be to only show a limited amount of text in users' feeds and then leave it to each individual to click on a button to see more.
"Twitter is an afterthought in social media right now," Pachter said.
"They need to do something to drive more usage of the service.
If people start using the service more frequently, other users will come join in, too." 
This savant2019s got wanderlust , This savant2019s got wanderlust 
Photo taken from Lorna E.
Herradura's Faebook
Kriztja Marae G.
Labrador, EVEN though she has already reached her highest educational attainment and is busy handling people under her office, this super woman still never stops learning and taking sidetrips at the same time.
Bureau of Plant Industry  Davao National Crop Research and Development Center agricultural center chief IV Lorna E.
Herradura, PhD loves learning and travelling at the same time.

She has also accepted the challenge of making a change to the lives of farmers through her work.
Herradura finished her elementary education at Davao City High School in 1977 and high school education at Holy Cross of Davao College in 1973.
She initially wanted to pursue a course on the medical field but the popular course at that time was in agriculture and so she took and finished Bachelor of Science in Agriculture specializing in Nematology at the University of the Philippines in Los Banos in 1982.
Herradura then continued on and finished her master2019s degree in Plant Pathology at UPLB specializing in Virology in 1993 and Doctorate degree in Bioscience Engineering at Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Belgium specializing in applied biological science in 2009.
She said that being on the field where she is now studying different plant diseases and looking for solutions to them is not what she has dreamed of she immediately fell in love with it.
201cI started with fisheries talaga but eventually naging passion ko na because I have seen the need to help farmers,201d Herradura said.
One of these famous plant diseases that she has pioneered in research was for the management of fusarium wilt primarily affecting banana farmers and finding some resistance varieties.
She also has become an award winning personality on her field with her research papers and she has also authored and co-authored several scientific and technical in both national and international publications.
Other than facing the day to day challenges of handling the BPI-Davao Office since 2005, Herradura likes to take her time off through nature-tripping.
One of her favorite destinations here in the country is Coron, Palawan which she labels as the place where she would always go back to.
Herradura shares that when she travels she loves to see and know the culture of the place where she is going just like her Ilocos trip.
201cDuring my trip to Ilocos I really went to their palengke wherein I found vegetables that we thought aren2019t edible are edible pala,201d she said.
For her foreign trips one of her most memorable ones are her Europe trip and the USA which are also a part of her study stints.
When asked how she would see herself in the future, she said that she sees herself applying for different scholarships to expand her field learning and also continuing her side-trips along the way.
Remembering Raf Benaldo: A man of Integrity, Remembering Raf Benaldo: A man of Integrity
Raf Benaldo and Dolly Ilogon in New York.
 
Riain Alfonso, IF HE were given one last chance to talk to his father, former House Representative Benjo Benaldo said that he would thank his dad for instilling in him the right values.

201cIf I had another chance aside from that, I will talk to him about basketball.201d  Benaldo2019s father, Serafin 201cRaf201d Benaldo, passed away last January 3.
 He was former assistant secretary of the Department of Interior and Local Government and was a leading media practitioner in Cagayan de Oro.
He was a very big influence according to Benaldo.
201cThe way I saw who I wanted to be was mainly based from what he taught me as a kid.
He wanted me to be a leader, to influence others, to do good.201d He furthered that his father was very religious, 201cIn fact he started out in the seminary because he wanted to become a priest.
The values he instilled in me were the same values that were instilled in him by the priests while he was growing up in the seminary as a young man.201d
Raf, an only child, was born on October 20, 1941, in the town of Gigaquit in Surigao del Norte.
He studied college at Xavier University and took his Masters in Public Administration at the University of Santo Tomas.
He made his mark in Cagayan de Oro as a media person and educator.
He started with DXCC, became the manager of GMA 12, and was the founder and producer of Newscope, the first live English TV program in Cagayan de Oro.
He taught in several universities and colleges including Xavier University and Ateneo de Manila, and was a former president of Don Mariano Marcos Memorial Polytechnic State College, now MUST.
 201cBecause he was also a professor, ganahan siya mag lecture,201d said Benaldo.

Raf was also an active civic leader and was president of the Metro Rotary Club.
He joined DILG after the appointment of Senator Nene Pimentel as Secretary of the said department by then President Cory Aquino.
He worked his way up and was promoted as Director of National Barangay Operations, became Director of DILG National Capital Region, and finally DILG Assistant Secretary.
He is well remembered and loved by his former staff, an excellent testimony of the type of man he was.
Media mentor
Raf was mentor to a lot of the city2019s media folks.
201cAs producer of Newscope, he set standards for his staff in our grammar, pronunciation, appearance, and most of all ethics.
He said I have to do things right to be respected as a newscaster,201d said Dolly Ilogon who first met him in 1980 during her stint as a female disc jockey for 99.9 RK.

She recalled that her first impression of him was that he was a good looking man with a pleasantly modulated voice, 201cTsada iyang voice, pang-announcer gyud.
I noticed that he spoke very good English and talks well.
Pahiluna mo istorya, has class.
I then felt that he was one decent kind of man, a respectable man.
His personality can demand respect.201d
201cI had the opportunity of working with him as his co-anchor on Newscope.
I felt honored to be sitting beside him delivering the nightly newscast on television.
He wanted excellence in work.
He guided me through, he taught me how to conduct interviews, the right questions to ask, how to deal with people, with the politicians,201d said Ilogon.

201cHe showed me the ropes in the broadcast industry.
He always reminded me to be a decent media person, to not be corrupt, always be fair, responsible, and credible.
He said that if I planned to stay long in the broadcast industry, then I have to take good care of my credibility.201d
Ralph saw integrity as very important and demanded this from the people he worked with.
He was a key figure in the development and growth of the Cagayan de Oro Press Club.
201cAs President of the club in 1983, he set the standard and helped it grow.
He wanted the club to be well respected and gave it a good name in the community,201d said Ilogon.
She added that he inspired the young, budding radio reporters and encouraged them to hone their skills and reach for their stars.
She believes that Newscope, a nightly, Monday to Friday, thirty minute newscast, is his greatest contribution to media in CdeO.
201cWe were the first live TV English news program.
Every night, CdeO2019s eyes were fixed on Newscope.
Ralph Benaldo was an authority in CdeO2019s broadcast industry.201d Newscope became the precursor to the current live broadcasts we see on television.
Ilogon warmly recalls that aside from being her boss and colleague, Ralph was also a wonderful and loyal friend.
When her marriage ended, he was there to give her his support and advice.
201cHe lifts up your spirits too.
Once when I was home from NY, he and Benjo treated me to dinner at the Fort.
I saw all these pretty young girls walking by and so I exclaimed, 2018Oh look at these girls, they look so pretty.2019  He said, 2018Dol, when you were their age, dili man sab ka mabentaha-an.
You were also one of the prettiest girls in Cagayan.2019 I was surprised and I laughed.201d
Anti-Marcos
Jerry Orcullo, COPC president, remembers Ralph as a colleague of Mindanao Alliance Speakers Bureau for northern Mindanao for Cory-Doy.
"He was with us, lawyers Gerry Adaza , Jun Pepito , Nonong Neri, and Frank Rojas.
We spoke in rallies," Orcullo shared.

"Raf was soft spoken and cool minded man.
Very well-mannered but an outspoken and staunch anti-Marcos critic.
We attended secret meetings with the united front of the National Democratic Front of the Philippines .
During the duration of the campaign for Cory-Doy, we carried with us our bags all the time as we slept in secret places, always transferring from one place to another to secure ourselves from Marcos forces," Orcullo recalled.
 
Orcullo also shared how brave Raf forcibly entered DMMPSC  crossing barricades set up by students teachers while stones flew as he marched toward the office of DMMMPSC president Melchizedek Maquiso to takeover his seat.
"Several were wounded including our supporters until the PC/INP Capt.
Jeff Soriano dispersed the rallyists," Orcullo said.
  
Married in Oro
It is in Cagayan de Oro that he met and married Almira Abrio.
Together, they have three children: the eldest of his brood is Benjo, then daughters Christina, and Ana Maria.
  
201cHe was serious in so many ways but as a father, when he was not a professor, when he was not a media man or a government official, he was extremely witty.
And I would want, and have been trying, to be like that,201d furthered Benaldo.

He fondly remembers how his father would be able to crack jokes and find the 2018funny2019 in any situation.
 201cHe would always joke around.
In fact, during our moments, when we were travelling, when we were alone as a family, kaming duha ang sigi mag-exchange ug mga jokes, kung kinsa ang mas funny.
I don2019t know if a lot of people know that about my father.
He can always find humor in anything.201d 
Benaldo shared that his father was also very passionate about basketball and recalled that their last conversation was about the sport.
 
One of his fondest memories of his dad is how they would always tease him about his nose.
201cWe would always tease him na pango iyang ilong kay kami tanan wala niliwat sa iya.201d He shared that as a kid, when he was practicing basketball, his father would create a hoop using his hands and arms.
201cDidto ko niya ipa shoot sa ball.
Bahala daw musamot ug ka pango iyang ilong, at least makabalo na ko mu-shoot.201d
No rules 
He recalled that, growing up, his father didn2019t really impose a lot of rules but was very supportive.
 201cBasically, wala kaayo siya2019y rules because early on, at an early age, he already set the most important rules.
Integrity, hard work, and most importantly, being a man for others.
In this world, you are not just doing everything for yourself but that you are doing everything for others.201d
The late Serafin 201cRalph201d Benaldo, husband, father, friend, respected mentor, a public servant, and a media man with integrity, was finally laid to rest at the Green Hills Memorial Park on January 9, 2016.
He was 74 years old.

Listening on a first person basis   , Listening on a first person basis   
DAVAO.
Student leaders of UP campuses nationwide integrate with lumads in Davao City.

Rhealyn C.
Pojas, WHILE many came to know the plights of the lumad-bakwits in UCCP Haran, only few can tell what it is like to actually live with them there and that includes the 130 students from the University of the Philippines System who slept at the shelter on the evening of January 5 and stayed there the following day.
 
Though they came from different places in the country and speak different dialects to represent their different UP campuses, they were one in discovering the personal accounts of the indigenous peoples in this evacuation center and show their support on the call to stop lumad killings.

So the main reason for coming was to conduct a basic mass integration with the lumads and to discover for themselves what things there were that they did not hear from the news apart from the other activities that they had conducted over the course of their stay at the shelter.

The members of the Katipunan ng Sanggunia ng Mag-aaral sa UP , an alliance of the university2019s student councils, and the UP Solidaridad, an alliance of UP student publications had arrived at the Haran shelter at around 8pm of January 5 and had slept at the vacant bunkhouses similar to the ones occupied by the lumads.

UP-Mindanao chairperson of the College of Humanities and Social Sciences  Jelyne Alapag said that though the experienced they had sleeping at the Haran shelter is different from what they were used to, they were whole-hearted to have the integration with the lumad evacuees.

201cEven for a short while we were able to experience the life that the lumads have at the evacuation center,201d Alapag shared adding that the evacuees2019 situation at the shelter is not easy.

It was not the first time they heard about the issues that the lumads have but Kasamasa UP Chairperson Raoul Manuel said in an interview with Sun.Star Davao that the Manilakbayan, a march protest staged by the lumad evacuees in the different parts of Luzon and the National Capital Region, heightened the knowledge they had about the lumad2019s situation.
 
201cManilakbayan had played an important role,201d Raoul admitted.

The reason why the UP student leaders chose UP Mindanao to be the venue of this year2019s national student congress themed 201cPangiyakki201d offshoots from the Manilakbayan where the lumads also happened to conduct one of their agenda for the event at the UP-Diliman campus.

On January 6, the different lumad evacuees had gained a hundred listening ears who did not mind sitting on a tarpaulin laid on the ground and being hit by the sunrays as the day got hotter.
They curled up their bodies and listened intently to what the IPs had to say.
 
Kasamasa UP Chairperson Manuel also said that the 2018iskolar ng bayan2019 can somehow relate to some issues faced by the bakwits like that on the claim of lands.

201cThe lumads and the iskolar ng bayan have the same problem on land ownership issues,201d Manuel said referring to the UP campuses that are facing the same threat relating to land issues.

UP system student regent Miguel Enrico Pangalangan also said during the press conference at the evacuation center held on the same day that though the UP administration has no backbone in helping the scholars themselves they are still bringing the lumad issues to the UP officials and to the studentry that they may also open their eyes to these issues and take an active participation.

201cHindi langito share-share ng posts sa social media about lumads,201d Pangalangan said to the students, saying further that though they were able to have a heart-to-heart talk with the lumads and had spent a night and day with them, they are still not fully integrated with them.
As student leaders, what we wish to happen for the lumads is that more people will open their eyes to the real situation that the lumads are facing, we want to call the governments2019 attention regarding this so that they may be able to take actions through writing and other means they can come up with under their capacity.

The rest of the immersion of the students at the Haran evacuation center went on as they interact with the lumads, cook food and eat with them, do psychosocial activities with the lumad children and series of interviews with the adult men and women who had sought refuge in the compound.
  
A day and a night may have been a short period but the realizations and experience they had after the immersion was something they cannot just easily bury into oblivion.

As Manuel said, 201cIt2019s different when you hear the story directly from them.201d
I2019m semi-disconnected and it's quite OK, I2019m semi-disconnected and it's quite OKRoark L.
Masbad, Wacky Tech, I AM writing this while on a vacation trip in Batanes.

I consider this place to be the last frontier of the Philippines.
Our own version of Marlboro Country.
It2019s very idyllic, serene, laid-back, rustic, provincial, foreign.
It2019s out of the way.
It2019s far.
It2019s remote.
It2019s almost disconnected.
Almost.

But I2019m actually ambivalent about its connection or disconnection.
I2019ve been here a day already but I2019m not really missing the internet or cellular signal at all.
Which brings me to ask -- do we really need this kind of connectivity in the first place? Wouldn2019t this just be some ruse by companies so they can milk from us our hard earned money?
Anyway, back to my thought.
Ambivalent on Batanes2019 connection or disconnection.

When I was thinking about this, I imagined a Batanes that had one phone line housed at the post office perhaps.
There2019s only a handful of TV sets with no cable.
And most definitely, no cellular signal and no Internet.
It might actually be too extreme to imagine but if you look at it again, that2019s exactly how it was back then.
Don2019t you miss those days? I know I do.

If that was actually true, Batanes could actually be that final frontier.
It could actually be that place we go to escape the brouhaha of our technology-ridden cities and lives that we sometimes forget to stop and look down and appreciate a small, yellow flower by the side of the road.


You see, when I got off the plane after arriving in Basco, I checked for cell signal.
What did I get? EDGE.
When we got to the inn we2019re staying, there2019s WI-FI but it2019s erratic as some people2019s love lives.
When we all went out for our first tour , I knew right away that I won2019t be able to post nice photos along the way because signal was bad.
But there2019s the silver lining right there.
Because of this disconnection, I was able to focus more on taking photos.
I saw more of where we are.
Appreciated more what surrounded me.
I even had a selfie with a carabao.


My point here is that it2019s not bad to unplug.
Nobody will look for you, believe me.

Unless, of course, if you2019re unplugging for some nefarious reason.

I just want to leave a thought with you about our ultra-dependence on communication technologies -- cellphones, tablets, laptops, etc.
That this ultra-dependence can never be healthy for us, in the end.
That this ultra-dependence is making us miss out on more important matters in our lives.
That this ultra-dependence is blinding us from the beauty that surrounds us every day.

Technology is a tool.
Use it.
Don2019t let it use you.
Erika and the art of styling space, Erika and the art of styling space
ELEMENTS OF STYLING.
Interior stylist Erika Joan Ong says her passion is a lot similar to that of styling celebrities, wherein she gets to know clients first and incorporating what she2019s learned into her work.
Deneb R.
Batucan, Interior stylist Erika Joan Ong imagines beautiful spaces wherever she goes
, WHEREVER life takes her, Erika Joan Ong always sees beauty in everything.
As a freelance interior stylist, this is what she has always set herself to master: look for that something special in everything and anything.
With her creative juices boiling up to the brim, Erika takes inspiration from the beauty that surrounds her.
201cMy aesthetic evolves constantly.
I get inspired easily.
Let2019s say I2019m reading a biography of an artist or I get inspired through my travels or by art.
But sometimes my aesthetic is dictated by the client.
I get their interests and run them through my own filters.
And then I give them options,201d she shared.
More about Erika's story on Sun.Star Weekend.

Chocolate health guru    , Chocolate health guru    Karina V.
Canedo, FRANCIS Gonzales, manager of New Free Food Corporation producer of Coco Dolce chocolate and coconut sugar, was a meditation guru who hails from Manila who found his way here.
He said that he started seriously practicing meditation in the year 1987.

201cIt is the time during the 80s in Manila, there is so much frustration due to political turmoil, it is as if looking for a direction in life,201d Gonzales said.

He said as he was introduced in that philosophy that our identity as a spiritual being in a temporary body and learned that meditation was the process that will help you achieve that realization.

201cWhen I was introduced to that philosophy in meditation especially our identity, who we are, we are a spiritual being temporarily in this body and that process that will help you achieve that realization is meditation, an ancient transcendental yoga sound that you practice in a daily basis.
A year after, I volunteered to learn more and to teach other people that kind of practice,201d Gonzales said.
 
Francis Gonzales said that his meditation teachings took him to different avenues of development and allowed him to tread the path of other people2019s development.

201dThat time I was exposed in community development.
I started organizing in universities in Manila.
I was also able to stay in Cebu for three years, the same; and I was a volunteer for development in Iloilo and in Cavite, I transferred in Davao in 2007, the same, to share what I learned and it is very helpful to individuals,201d Gonzales added.

Gonzales said that the logical and very simple philosophy that is encapsulated in the meditation practice reinforced his way of dealing with other people so much.

201cThat is why I can actually go to different kinds of communities like Christian, non Christian, Indigenous Peoples  because the foundation is actually knowing they are who we are, that in fact you2019re spiritual.
 
Labels like Filipino, American, Muslims and Christians most are labels that you can change for that is not our eternal being that is just our temporary nature and understanding those is very important in developing communities,201d Gonzales said.

Gonzales said that when he was in Cebu he focused his community development goals in schools and in urban community and this goal, in helping develop communities led him to chocolate industry.

201c chocolate business is an attempt to help cacao farmers because we know farmers are working a lot but they earn too little,201d he said.
They buy beans at a premium price, he said, thus benefitting the farmers.
 Above that is the benefit to the consumers.
 
201cWe actually produce a healthy chocolate,201d Gonzales said.
He saw that doing business is a venue to help people.
201cYour fruits of labor in business can be spiritualized and can also be a form of meditation,201d Gonzales said.

201cWe believe kasi in cause and effect karma, whatever you did comes back to you and if you exploit people, their approach will be bad too.
If you help people, it will come back to you,201d Gonzales said.
 
Vegetarian for 30 years, Gonzales said they ensure that their chocolates are healthy by incorporating coco sugar and virgin coconut oil as the other ingredients in their chocolate products.

With the initial success of their product launch in 2014, he believes that satisfaction borne with is sourced from the people they2019ve helped with their product.

201cDoing your business while helping other people at the same time is already a success,201d Gonzales said adding that whether these people will succeed or not at least you gave them help while they needed it.

Gonzales as of the moment while concentrating as a manager of their chocolate business, he is also assisting cacao cooperatives and is hopeful to someday teach them  to produce not just cacao beans but also chocolates on their own because he believes that is one way that the farmers can really make increased profit out of their product.
 
Gonzales aims to ensure the quality of the products they produce but also the increased quality and sustainable lives of the farmers he2019s helping.
201cQuality is very important just like what we are doing in our business.
We are helping cooperatives also we don2019t have much resources but we have will help produce quality cacao products and quality and productive cooperative,201d Gonzales said.
To achieve quality life you must live simply but with higher thinking, Gonzales said.
 
He added that this quality life you must have awareness of yourself, understanding yourself, understanding the nature of the world and understanding other people and understanding your supreme being.
Gonzales said that his initial goal in life is the Love for God.

201cLahat ng undertaking, goals in life yun ang target, walang katapusan, yun ang wala tayo,201d he said.

He said that he is attaining this state through his practice of meditation yoga, and he is doing that 24 hours a day.
201cIt is not sitting down and closing your eyes, it is an active lifestyle, if we are talking about God, that is meditation and if you are doing business using money and teaching other people, that is also meditation, it could be meditation and it depends upon the purpose and intention,201d Gonzales said.

What dreams are made of, What dreams are made of
DAVAO.
Matanam  Jaime M.
Odo Sr.
presides over a meeting with the Apo Governance and Indigenous Leadership Acacemy  board of trustees and Bagobo-Tagabawa people in barangay Batasan, Makilala, North Cotabato.

Stella A.
Estremera, EVERYTHING started with one question.
201cWhy is it that there is a police academy for those wanting to join the police force, a military academy for soldiers, even a development academy for development workers, but no academy for indigenous leadership?201d 
This was the question raised by Fr.
Albert E.
Alejo SJ, who has been known to be working closely with indigenous peoples and Moro groups in Mindanao as he encouraged people who shared his sentiments to do something about it.
In an island of at least 13 indigenous peoples groups, this should be unthinkable.

The governance and leadership systems of the indigenous people are slowly being eroded amid a mainstreamed system of education and the penchant of the young to go with what is new and preference of not being associated with the old.
Put in investors lusting for their ancestral domains that, most of the time, are the last frontiers of the environment rich in natural resources, then there are even instances when indigenous leadership and governance are also corrupted.

In a prevailing system where traditional leadership and governance systems are left to die away, the indigenous peoples on which these systems thrive are likewise weakened.

201cWala 2018ta gihimo ni Manama para daog-daogon ,201d Fr.
Alejo told a group of people belonging to the Bagobo-Tagabawa tribe in barangay Batasan last week.
But, he said, it is up to the indigenous groups to protect their own people and ways.

201cKung dili ta mag-amping, daog-daogon gyud 2018ta ,201d he added.

Thus, a group of indigenous leaders and personalities who have interest in indigenous peoples development gathered to form the Apo Governance and Indigenous Leadership Academy  that has been provided an office space for free at the Ateneo de Davao University, and 200 hectares of the ancestral domain of the Bagobo-Tagabawa in barangays Buhay, Buena Vida, Batasan, and Biangan in Makilala, North Cotabato, that includes a huge waterfall on its northern tip, a small waterfalls and hot spring at its entrance area, and a medium-sized waterfalls a few hundred meters farther in.
First item in the agenda: Find supporters who can build the dreams of the tribes to have their own leadership academy to pass on to the young how different systems.

But before that, the group has to be accepted and welcomed into the communities that they intend to work with.

Thus, last January 13, the Agila board of trustees composed of its president businessman and Ateneo de Davao University board of trustees chair Benjamin A.
Lizada, vice president Bienvenido G.
Macalos, formerly of the Buhay, Buena Vida, Batasan, Biangan  people2019s organization; secretary Stella A.
Estremera of Sun.Star Davao; treasurer Atty.
Romeo T.
Cabarde Jr.
of ADDU, and trustees Fr.
Albert E.
Alejo SJ, former National Commission on Indigenous Peoples North Cotabato officer Jennifer Pia Sibug-Las, Jamie M.
Odo Sr., a matanam or datu of the Bagobo-Tagabawa, matanam Mercado P.
Padayag of barangay Biangan, president of the League of Indigenous People's Mandatory Representatives-Mindanao Inc.
 Robert R.
Simbahon, Ricardo A.
Palmitan of the Farmcoop, and Easterluna S.
Canoy, the executive director of the Kitanglad Integrated NGOs based in Bukidnon along with NGO workers, members of the academe, and the Development Academy of the Philippines  participated in a ritual of acceptance at the waterfalls within the 200-hectare lot.
 
Ritual of acceptance
The ritual beside the river where a table of offerings was set up was done by Agtugallan Ronel D.
Amoy, Agtugallan Manuel M.
Panggilan and Bae Analyn P.
Amoy.
Agtugallan is the title the Bagobo-Tagabawa use to address their baylans or shamans.
On the table covered with white cloth where seven pieces of boiled rice wrapped in leaves arranged in a circle.

Within the circle was a bowl also covered with white cloth that contained a knife, two betel nuts and a few leaves, and an egg.
During the ritual a black chicken was slaughtered and its blood was scattered around the ritual table, while a white chicken was held up amid some prayers uttered before it was thrown to the air, and set free.

Agtugallan Amoy later explained that they were praying to the higher spirits to accept the people who come to bring some benefits to the indigenous peoples.

The knife, he said, 201cis to clear away what separates the mortal from the spirit world.201d 
The betel nut represents relationship as it is the practice of the tribes to share some betel chews when they sit down to welcome visitors or settle some issues.
The egg represents care as rough handling of an egg can easily break it.
The white close represents the love shared between the mortal and the spiritual world.

Wish List
Soon after, the board of trustees sat down in a clearing beside the hot springs to listen to the people on what they wish the academy would have.
Top on the list is a training center.
This is also the priority of Agila.

But given that the academy should be able to sustain itself after initial assistance from willing donors, economic activities have to be introduced within the 200-hectare land that complies with the Bagobo-Tagabawa2019s Ancestral Domain Sustainable Development and Protection Plan  for their 2,973.10 hectares of ancestral domain at the foot of Mount Apo, within which is the 200 hectares granted the Agila.

The others in the list are a canopy walk with cottages for visitors, a 201ckan-anan201d or restaurant offering native delicacies and recipes, an organic farm and a facility for producing organic fertilizer, a research center, a resort, a wildlife sanctuary, a nursery for endemic species, a trading center, a ritual area, a livestock and livelihood center, solar power facility, water system, mineral water plant, a museum, a cultural center for performances, a multi-tribal village, an annual festival, indigenous sports facility, loom-weaving and handicrafts center, an entrance marker, a blacksmithery, a center to learn cultural dances, how play instruments, and chants, a meeting hall, a center for indigenous justice and conflict settlement, an indigenous wellness and health center, an orientation center, a waste management facility, and security facility.
It was clear that the residents and their leaders are expecting a lot, and need to do a lot as well.

Agila assistant director Jing Bantayan in his report to the community said that a roadshow for funders is being organized so that work on the training center can commence as soon as possible.

201cHopefully, karong tuiga, naay mahitabo na one to two buildings ,201d he said.

In the meantime, the people were reminded that there may be outsiders like some of the Agila BOT who are working to find funders, but the tribe itself has already contributed more than any funder can ever contribute, as they own the 200-hectare lot where the Agila will be built.

In the meantime, every one shares a common dream and are sharing this dream to others willing enough to listen and dream with them.
Masbad: Quickfire, Masbad: QuickfireRoark L.
Masbad, Wacky Tech, I'M' still on a hangover from my recent Batanes trip.
Yes, it's got that kind of effect.
Anyway, I'll keep this one short and sweet.
First up, news came in recently that Bitcoin has failed.
This was claimed by one of its developers.
You can find out more with this article.
But could this be just a ruse to keep prying eyes away from Bitcoin? Who knows?
I2019m not sure if you2019ve noticed recently this small change inside Facebook2019s mobile app.
It2019s using or possibly testing a new in-app browser and a few other small niggles that have been added to the app.
Learn more about it here.
Abacus.
No, not the Chinese counting device.
It2019s the latest from Google.
Abacus is their plan and project how to kill the password once and for all.
I2019m not really sure how to feel about this though.
In one hand, I2019m happy to have a password or two  in my head that nobody else knows but me.
But the promise of convenience cannot be denied as well.
I2019ll be looking out for the development of this in the coming future.
Know more about Abacus here.
So there.
As promised, quick fire.

Happy Sinology to all my friends in Cebu!
Viva Pit Senyor!
Space station astronauts grow first flower outside Earth, Space station astronauts grow first flower outside EarthWASHINGTON -- Astronauts aboard the International Space Station have successfully grown a flower to a full bloom for the first time outside our Earth.
Scott Kelly of the US space agency NASA tweeted this weekend that a zinnia has flowered in the microgravity environment of the orbiting laboratory, along with an accompanying photo of an orange flower with 13 petals.

First ever flower grown in space makes its debut! #SpaceFlower #zinnia #YearInSpace pic.twitter.com/2uGYvwtLKr
2014 Scott Kelly  January 16, 2016

"First ever flower grown in space makes its debut! #SpaceFlower #zinnia #YearInSpace," wrote Kelly, adding: "Yes, there are other life forms in space!"
A NASA article explained that zinnias were chosen not for their beauty but to "help scientists understand how plants flower and grow in microgravity."
Previously, other plants such as wheat and romaine lettuce have been grown in space.
When a batch of lettuce was harvested in August on the space station, NASA astronauts were even allowed to eat the fruits of their labor for the first time.

#SpaceFlower out in the sun for the first time! #YearInSpace pic.twitter.com/Cghu9XGv1J
2014 Scott Kelly  January 17, 2016

Growing zinnias seemed to post more challenges to in-orbit gardeners than growing a vegetative crop such as lettuce.
"The zinnia plant is very different from lettuce," said Trent Smith, NASA's Veggie project manager.
"It is more sensitive to environmental parameters and light characteristics.
It has a longer growth duration between 60 and 80 days.
Thus, it is a more difficult plant to grow."
Just more than two weeks into their growth period, astronauts noted that water was seeping out of some of the crop's leaves, a condition that occurs when a plant is experiencing high humidity.
To fix it, they adjusted the speed of the station's veggie facility fan from low to high to dry them out, but that didn't prevent two of the plants from dying.
The remaining two plants continued to thrive and one of them eventually blossomed into a flower this weekend.
More crops will be sent to the space station this year, including Chinese cabbage and romaine lettuce.
NASA said the lessons learned from these plants will help grow tomatoes in 2018.
The implications of plant life for space missions are very significant, including helping boosting astronauts' spirits while they're working there.
"Plants can indeed enhance long duration missions in isolated, confined and extreme environments -- environments that are artificial and deprived of nature," said Alexandra Whitmire, deputy scientist for the Behavioral Health and Performance element in the NASA Human Research Program.
"While not all crew members may enjoy taking care of plants, for many, having this option is beneficial."
In the long term, plant experiments will yield important information in preparation for a Mars mission.
"In future missions, the importance of plants will likely increase given the crews' limited connection to Earth," Whitmire said.
"Studies from other isolated and confined environments, such as Antarctic stations, demonstrate the importance of plants in confinement, and how much more salient fresh food becomes psychologically, when there is little stimuli around." 
Water is life and so our beautiful Lake Pinamaloy, Water is life and so our beautiful Lake Pinamaloy
CAGAYAN DE ORO.
Lake Pinamaloy is Don Carlos town2019s pride where anyone can enjoy this beautiful place and appreciate the wondrous works of God.

THERE are more things to talk about the booming town of Don Carlos, Bukidnon.
And its famous Lake Pinamaloy 2013 a 60-hectare inland body of water located right within the town proper2019s vicinity is definitely one of them.
To innocent children, the enchanted lake and its surroundings are like vast playground they could enjoy with so organic natural amenities that can be seen in fantasy movie like Alice in Wonderland.

To lovers, its lush green fields command serenity that2019s quite perfect for naughty rendezvous.
In fact, it2019s an ideal place for city-based writers as an alternative hideaway from the so-called life in the fast lane.
And for the serious types, understandably comprising just a fraction of this town2019s entire population.
Of course, it2019s a big deal for human survival being the community2019s main source of potable water.
     
The beautiful lake of Don Carlos, which is like a guitar-shaped from the aerial view, got its name from an old fable or fairy tale story shared to the new generation.
 
Legend has it that once upon a time in a plain and woody place in Bukidnon, there lived a couple who had no child.
They longed to have a child and so they prayed hard.
One day, there came an old woman.
She told them that they would soon have a child.
But the child must not step on the ground.
After several months, the wife delivered a lovely baby girl.
They named her Pina.
They gave her the abundance of life except for one thing.
She was not allowed to step on the ground.
But one day, Pina went down.
When she stepped on the land, it began to shake.
Pools of water came out and Pina disappeared.
Her parents tried to find her.
They kept on calling her name 2013 201cPina malooy ka201d 2013 a pitiful cry for Pina.
Now, the lake is called 201cPinamaloy.201d It is primarily the source of water in the municipality of Don Carlos.
It is also where some of the church activities are being held, like the Stations of the Cross during Lenten season, special wedding ceremonies and recollections.
Other occasions like batch parties during Christmas break, family bonding and dry picnic with friends and special someone are also happening here.
This place is also significant for most of the couples in Don Carlos.
It has been a part of their love story.
The serenity of the place helps each one appreciate God2019s creation especially human life.
As one of the tourist attractions in Bukidnon, the place is being developed by the municipality.
The tourism hall is aesthetically designed.
It is surrounded by different variety of flowering plants.
It2019s also the place where tree planting and tree growing activities are usually done.
It2019s a treasure that must be preserved and protected.
By not preserving, protecting and conserving Lake Pinamaloy, the whole community of Don Carlos will suffer.
Water is life.
It must be properly utilized and managed.
Managing our waste properly is the best way.
Water could easily be contaminated, thereby spreading various kinds of harmful diseases.
So let2019s be responsible for our waste.
Let2019s protect life and preserve our natural resources.

He talks, and walks, conservation  , He talks, and walks, conservation  Rhealyn C.
Pojas, ONE encounter with him will give you an impression that he is both a great conversationalist and conservationist.
 
Why? You might ask.
Because people like him walks his talk just to educate people on the importance of conserving the environment and species which are facing threats and had accomplished many other things just to push for his advocacy more than anything else which only proves that he is not a blabber but a doer.
His Curriculum Vitae will attest to that.
  
If you have not heard about him, then you probably heard about this bird sanctuary in Malagos in Calinan -- the Philippine Eagle Foundation  Center.
Jayson Iba\xf1ez is the Director of the Research and Conservation Program of the PEF.

A quick look at his CV will reveal words such as biodiversity conservation, ecology, habitat restoration, natural resource management among the other pile of words that are closely related to his advocacy.
 Though not born in Davao, Iba\xf1ez said that he considers himself a naturalized Dabawenyos since he first arrived in the city 21 years ago as field biologist of PEF.
He has fallen in love with Davao and eventually decided to settle down and live here.

Iba\xf1ez recalled in an interview with Sun.Star Davao that he first saw the Philippine Eagle in a picture featured in the National Geographic Magazine in 1981 when he was young.

Little did he know then that he is going to devote his later years in working at the foundation2019s center which houses this giant raptor.
His drive to push for the advocacy was manifested as early as his childhood years as he loved animals and had grown up loving to play out in the rice fields in Pangasinan where he was born.

With this fascination, he took up a Bachelor2019s degree in Biology at the University of the Philippines-Los Ba\xf1os and went to Davao City and started his early work at the PEF which only intensified his urge to work for the environment conservation in the region.
Eventually he became the Director of PEF2019S research and conservation program since September 2009 until the present.

With this interest, Iba\xf1ez had already made various research and programs that help elevate awareness and knowledge to protect and conserve the environment along with the species lurking on its depths.

In fact just last April 29, 2015, Iba\xf1ez2019s conservation research has become one of the recipients of the Whitley Award in the United Kingdom.
The award recognized efforts to conserve the Philippine Eagle in Mindanao and funded the foundation in meeting their goals to protect and conserve the national bird.
 
Prior to this, they had also garnered another award from the Yale International Society for Tropical Foresters  Innovation Prize which placed them in the second place during its awarding day on January 31 last year.

What with all this work, Iba\xf1ez said that, 201cMoney should not be the goal,201d because 201cWe can also gain wealth from having good relationships and through interacting with nature.201d 
201cPeople should go back to their roots by engaging more in visiting natural places and spending more time in parks ratherthan being in the malls,201d Iba\xf1ez said citing the Biophilia hypothesis which explains that humans have natural desires to be in touched with nature.
 
201cIf every Filipino learns to recognize their roots and renew their good relationship with nature then it is a win-win situation for the environment and for us because based on the Biophilia hypothesis it is important to us,201d Iba\xf1ez said.
Boiling pot: The ethnolinguistic stew that2019s distinctly Davao  , Boiling pot: The ethnolinguistic stew that2019s distinctly Davao  Stella A.
Estremera, SUN.STAR Davao columnist Mags Maglana posted on her Facebook a photo of a sign posted in a clothing shop along Ilustre Street, Davao City, with the blurb: 201cYou know you2019re in Davao when2026 .201d 
The sign reads: 201cBawal magkain sa loob .201d  
For the non-Filipino, the Filipino language has what is called panlapi, a means to conjugate a verb to change the tense of the rootword to past, present or future.
T
he right panlapi for 201ckain201d will be a gitlapi , thus the sign should have read: 201cBawal kumain dito.201d Dabawenyos are notorious at breaking the panlapi rules and would insist on simply using mag, nag/naga, and gi/gina to change tenses, all as unlapi .

Often enough, Dabawenyos kid ourselves by the way we mangle Tagalog and Bisaya to the dismay of the Tagalogs and the Cebuanos, but to the gleeful entertainment of the locals.
The mangling is not deliberate, by the way.

It2019s just what comes out when a city gets people from all over the country who come with their different dialects while trying to be understood by all.
 
That Davao City is the epitome of what a boiling pot of Filipino cultures in all their indigenous and endemic ways and languages, however, is not just about the major ethno-linguistic groups coming down here and settling in.
It has been like that, even way back in history, when the Luzon and Visayas people still did not have the vehicles to come over.

History books will attest to that.
The latest welcome addition is the one by Bro.
Karl M.
Gaspar, CSSR, Sun.Star Davao Gawad Dabawenyo recipient for its 20th year last year, which he launched late last year.

A very thin volume entitled 201cDavao in the Pre-Conquest Era and the Age of Colonization201d gives us a short but information-filled walk around Davao, which you will need to read several volumes of books to know about.

201cWhen the Spaniards colonized Davao Gulf in 1848, they noted that the region had the most number of tribes anywhere in the country,201d Gaspar quoted a passage from Dr.
Macario D.
Tiu2019s 201cDavao: Reconstructing History from Text and Memory201d published in 2005.
Fr.
Mateo Gisbert SJ, who spend his entire missionary life in eastern Mindanao from 1879, listed the various populations of the tribes in Davao in 1886, including: Ata, 25,000, Blaan, 20,000, Kaolo, 12,000 to 14,000, Bagobos, 10,000, Guingans, 6,400, and Manobo, 1,200, with Islamized Samals on Samal Island and Kalagans  further south.

This is aside from the Tusugs and Maguindanaoans who settled along Davao Gulf from their original settlements in the southern-most islands of Sulu and central Mindanao lands.
Gaspar then referred to Fay Cooper Cole2019s 201cThe Wild Tribes of Davao District201d  and Ferdinand Blumentritt2019s 201cPhilippine Tribes and Languages201d  who had a longer list: Ata, Bagobo, Blaan, Kulaman, Dulangan, Loac, Maguindanao, Mansaka, Mandaya, Manobo, Guingan, Libaon, Mangguangan, and Tagacaolo .

Dr.
Tiu's book came up with an even more comprehensive listing of the city2019s enthnolinguisitic groups, but which he qualified to need further study.

His list is: Ata, Bagobo, Blaan, Dibabawon, Giangan, Kalagan, Kulaman Manobo, Mandaya, Mangguwangan, Mansaka, Matigsalog, Obo, Samal, Sangil, Tagakaolo, and the less known Attaw, Eto, Klata, Loac, Managosan, Manurigaw, Pagsupan, and Tigdapayas.
That the indigenous groups persist to these days when the Davao mix now includes settlers from Visayas and Luzon gives a hint on how these indigenous groups have resisted attempts to take away their identities.

201cDuring the early years of colonization, Davao was already noted for the richness of its soil and the abundance of its natural resources.
However, Davao2019s development under Spanish rule went very slow.
At a time when the Katipunan Revolution broke out in Luzon, the Spanish forces were still pacifying the Lumads in Davao,201d Gaspar2019s book reads.

201cThe colonizers aggressively organized reducciones as the friars reinforced the pacification drive by their attempts at proselytization.
The tribal people resented being forced to work and to pay tribue, so even as they would acceded to living in the settlements at certain times, at other times, especially when the priests and soldiers left, they disappeared into the forests,201d the book continues.

In-migration continued with settlers coming in along with other government officials tasked to exploit Davao2019s resources.
The Spaniards brought people from Cebu, Bohol, and Leyte.
The Americans brought around 200 former soldiers and teachers 201cmaking Davao the most Americanized town in the country201d.

As American plantations prospered, they imported Japanese workers who were working on the Kennon Road project in the Mountain Province.
The first batch of 25 Japanese workers arrived in 1903.
Two years later, there were 154 more who came in various batches.

The Japanese became more successful in running plantations, in time, they outnumbered the American plantations.

201cBy 1918, Japanese plantations numbered 71 compared to only 34 American estates,201d Gaspar2019s book read.
By 1918, there were 5,612 Japanese in Davao.

The Americans, too, were having difficulty in labor, marketing, and productivity, many were forced to sell to the Japanese.
Ten years later, only 24 American plantations remained and 62 Japanese.
Filipinos owned 106, Chinese owned 13, and one plantation had a Spanish owner.

201cJapanese interests expanded to timber and coconut, even as they set up banks, stores as well as schools and hospitals.
In the port, one saw many Japanese shops as Davao became part of the Japanese trade map.
They also intermarried with the local population,201d Gaspar writes.

201cIn a span of three decades, the population of Davao province grew from 65,463 in 1903 to 107,385 in 1917 and 292,600 in 19392019 as 2018the idea of Davao as a land of promise caught the nation2019s imagination2019,201d the book continues.

By 1936, migrant Filipinos numbered 79,092 compared to the lumad population of just 68,356, aside from the Japanese population of 12,244 and some Chinese.
By the time World War II broke out, there were 19,900 Japanese in Davao.

With a history like this, indeed, Davao is the real boiling pot, and we cannot blame ourselves if we speak and understand each other even when we say: 201cBawal magkain sa loob.201d
Society: Perfecto Mercado: The Dream Lives On , Society: Perfecto Mercado: The Dream Lives On Ian Ocampo Flora, ARTISTS come and go, but the great ones usually live on through their art.
Such is the case of artist Perfecto Mercado, his art endures through the appreciation of art lovers and friends.
Art writer Gari Apolonio narrates how the master artist struggled with keeping his work as the center of his life.
He said that Perfecto Mercado, in the weeks of March 2011, was simultaneously starting and finishing paintings in his cramped studio in Capas, Tarlac.
He was more zealous and more in his element this time, creating the dream-like barren landscapes he has become known for:  a visual idiom of boulders, solitary trees, distant mountains  and camouflaged faces that started taking shape around 2002.

201cHe just finished two large works and just primed a medium-sized canvas which was intended for entry in this year2019s GSIS Art Competition.
He also asked his son Arnold to get him more canvases on which to work on despite the several blank canvases lining the dining hall leading to his studio.
 Creating and planning feverishly, it seemed that he was catching up with time,201d Apolonio said in his recent article for Mercado.
In the early morning of March 23, Mercado was roused from his dreamy sleep by severe discomfort, head aching and his chest tightening.
He woke up his wife Teresita and asked her if it was indeed humid and hot as he was sweating profusely.
To ease his discomfort, her wife turned on the air conditioner.
But within minutes, the pain became evidently unbearable.

In panic, she called on her daughters living nearby for help.
He was rushed to the local hospital and was confirmed to be suffering from stroke.
On the morning of the following day, March 30, he was officially pronounced gone out of this world.
For an artist on a threshold of exciting possibilities, Mercado2019s demise came so sudden and so out of time.
Bigger plans had been laid out for him.
The plans, initiated by his son Arnold who is also his frontline support and confidante, include a breakthrough solo show of his more monumental works in one of the Philippines 2019 major museums, the Metropolitan Museum of Manila.
Another important project is a definitive book on his life and art.
 
Indeed, these are projects intended to bring Mercado and his art to a wider audience and to a state of greater access and mass recognition.
What2019s essentially discomforting, however, is not being able  to see the other masterful configurations of his dreamscapes that are yet to come out of his studio had he not left.
Apolonio added that for the last ten years, Mercado2019s style and vision has been evolving profoundly and significantly.
The last decade marked his most original phase, defiant of compromising forces either from clients or fellow artists.
 
This period, as they call it in the field of music, was in crescendo, spiraling upward and about to reach its peak.
 
There was the energy and the bravura and this makes his most ardent follower keen to see what he may have reached; the color palette, composition, the scope, the vision.
He may never have reached the summit due to his untimely demise, but along the course of that journey, he has left behind priceless jewels.
Though numbering less than a thousand, the jewels are enigmatic and numerous enough to enthrall not only those close to him but also the succeeding generations of art lovers within and beyond the provinces of Tarlac and Pampanga.
    
For comments, suggestions, violent reactions, invites, indignant rebuttals and what-have-you email: ianocampoflora@yahoo.com 
Pope Francis answers questions from children in new book , Pope Francis answers questions from children in new book 
This image released by Loyola Press shows 201cDear Pope Francis: The Pope Answers Letters from Children Around the World,201d by Pope Francis.

NEW YORK -- 201cDear Pope Francis,201d 10-year-old Mohammed begins, 201cWill the world be again as it was in the past?201d
Signed 201cRespectfully yours,201d the boy wrote from a Jesuit-run school for refugee children in Syria and was treated to a long and personal answer from the pope himself.
So were 29 other children who posed questions to Francis in letters from around the globe for a new book poignantly illustrated with their own artwork.
The book, 201cDear Pope Francis,201d is out March 1 from Loyola Press in Chicago.
It2019s a project that likely wouldn2019t have materialized without the help of Father Antonio Spadaro, a Jesuit like the pope and the director of La Civilta Cattolica, a Roman Catholic journal published in Rome.
Tom McGrath of the Jesuit-founded publishing house co-edited the book with Spadaro after reaching out to the priest for help.
Spadaro brought about 50 letters with questions to the pope so he could select 30.
Spadaro sat with the pope as he responded to each.
Francis often complimented the artwork of the children.
201cHe knows Pope Francis very well,201d McGrath said of Spadaro.
201cWe tried to make it as easy for the pope as possible.201d
The pope2019s response to Mohammed spoke in part of suffering and the people who inflict it.
201cThere are those who manufacture weapons so that people fight each other and wage war.
There are people who have hate in their hearts.
There are people who are interested only in money and would sell everything for it.
They would even sell other people,201d he wrote.
More to Mohammed2019s point, Francis answered: 201cNo, when the time comes, the world will not be as it was.
It will be far better than it was in the past.201d
Once the pope agreed to participate in the project, Loyola reached out to priests and lay people around the world to connect the publisher with children to write the letters.
The 30 kids in the book range in age from 6 to 13.
In all, about 250 letters were received in 14 languages from 26 countries around the globe.
The pope wound up with about 50 letters from which to choose.
201cHe loved the project right from the beginning,201d McGrath said.
201cHe has this great affection for children, who have a great affection for him.
He was surprised at the depth of the questions.201d
There was no condensing or editing of the pope2019s responses.
In a 90-minute session with Spadaro last August in Rome, Francis responded verbally in a mixture of Italian and Spanish.
Spadaro served as transcriber in addition to connecting Loyola Press with the Vatican.
201cThese are the pope2019s exact words,201d McGrath said.
201cAt one point he mentioned, 2018These are tough.2019 He realized that he owed the kids a deeper answer than right off the top of his head.201d
Spadaro said via email that the pope truly pondered when answering the children.
201cOften he looked off into space and tried to imagine the child in front of him,201d he said.
201cAnd in his gaze I saw care, love.201d
Loyola will publish the book in English and Spanish.
As an international Jesuit project, it will also be published simultaneously around the world, including in Brazil, Indonesia, Slovenia, Mexico and India.
Arrangements were still being made but Loyola Press plans to bring 10 of the children included in the book to Rome to meet the pope in person, hopefully in February before its March publication date.
201cThe pope is eager to meet them,201d McGrath said.
201cHe was quick to say he would like to make that happen.201d
They2019ll be traveling with their parents from China, Ireland, Argentina, India, Canada, Kenya, Singapore, Australia, the United States, and the Philippines.
Mohammed will not be among them, but 8-year-old Natasha from Kenya will make the trip to Rome.
She asked the pope in her letter: 201cI would like to know more about Jesus Christ.
How did he walk on water?201d
The pope2019s response?
201cYou have to imagine Jesus walking naturally, normally.
He did not fly over the water or turn somersaults while swimming,201d he wrote.
201cHe walked as you walk! ...
Jesus is God, and so he can do anything!201d
While one child wanted to know why parents fight and another why the pope wears such a tall hat, 7-year-old William of the United States asked: 201cIf you could do one miracle what would it be?201d
201cDear William,201d the pope said.
201cI would heal children.
I2019ve never been able to understand why children suffer.
It2019s a mystery to me.
I don2019t have an explanation.201d 
Annyka Cha and the love for golf, Annyka Cha and the love for golfIan Ocampo Flora, ANNYKA CHANEL 201cCHA201d PINEDA-CAYABYAB, five-time world junior golf  champion and youngest Most Outstanding Kapampangan Awards   recipient, has changed a lot both as a young person and golfer since 2014 when a veteran coach began to handle her.
Annyka, granddaughter of Pampanga Governor Lilia Pineda and businessman Rodolfo 201cBong201d Pineda, 201cvastly improved overall as a golfer201d in two years, said  Norman Sto.
Domingo, a much-sought-out golf coach.
Sto.
Domingo, who was trained how to teach by professional golf icon Jack Nicklaus himself and his team in Pebble Beach, California, U.S.A., immediately instilled the value of respect and hard work to Annyka when they first met on February 3, 2014.
Sto.
Domingo agreed to handle Annyka after he was assured by her parents 2013  Lubao Mayor Mylyn Pineda-Cayabyab and  Archen Cayabyab, former player of the National University basketball team and Philippine Basketball League 2013 that their daughter was 201ca coachable player and kind.201d  
201cAnnyka is more than I expected to be.
Our relationship is much better nowadays,201d said Sto.
Domingo.
201cShe is a very simple person and one of the most humble players I met.
More importantly, I can see a future champion in amatuer and professional golf tournaments in the country and abroad,201d he added.
Either Annyka or Cha
Annyka was interviewed at the Pradera Verde2019s wakeboard park in Barangay Prado Siongco, here, on January 23 and she requested for an extension of the interview.
It was not typical of the 11-year-old Grade 6 student at the OB Montessori Center in Greenhills, San Juan City.
Previously, Annyka would hardly talk during interviews, admitting she was shy.
Asked about her sudden change of attitude when being interviewed, Sto, Domingo said: 201cShe is more confident now both as a person and player and it2019s good.201d
201cAnnyka is now braver during games due to the renewed confidence,201d he added.
 
201cI want to spend time with my family, especially my cousins.
I enjoy a lot when I am with them, my parents and grandparents,201d said Annyka at the end portion of the interview.
201cI love to play with our dogs as well.201d
201cI am Annyka in school and Cha when I am playing golf,201d she added.
Annyka happily hangs around with her classmates, loves to read books, likes tuna sandwich and plays Playstation 4 games when she has free time, she disclosed.
Her favorites are the Percy Jackson book series.

Cha started to play serious golf when she was six after being influenced by her grandfather, a golf enthusiast whom they call 201cTatay .201d
Cha practices six times a week when she is not playing in tournaments.
She usually eats lunch in the car after finishing school at 12:15 p.m.
201cI sometimes tell coach I am tired and he allows me to rest before the start of practice .
He understands me,201d Cha said.
201cI feel pressured once in a while as Cha.
I love more being Annyka as a student and one of the apos ,201d she added.
She, however, stressed that 201cI really love golf and I want to improve more.201d
201cAnnyka is just being human and acting like any other 11-year-old kid,201d said Sto.
Domingo.
She has 201cright attitude, all-out support and awesome talent to succeed in the toughest local and international competions,201d he added.
Family Day
Annyka said 201cSundays are best because I have time to be with my family,201d including her three-year-old sister, Andrea Celine.
Annyka added that she and her cousins are usually taken to the malls and stores by their grandmother to eat and shop for clothes and other stuffs.
201cMy grandma will ask me if I want 2018this and that2019 at the malls but I often refuse.
As I have said, I just want to be with my family and cousins,201d   she stressed.
Annyka said her grandfather buys her food when he is in Metro Manila.
They both stay in one house in San Juan City.
201cWhen grandpa is at home, he asks me to eat breakfast before I leave for school.
I love to accept his offer but I can2019t because my class starts early in the morning,201d she added.
On July 2016, Annyka is set compete at the Veritas Junior Golf at the Brookside Golf Course in Pasadena, California.
She topped the tournament  four straight times beginning 2012.
 
Under Sto.
Domingo, Annyka ruled the Future Champions of Golf International junior championships at the Riverwalk Golf and Club in San Diego, California in 2014.
In September 2014, Annyka and at least three major winners of tournaments in the USA were cited and given plaques of appreciations by the Senate members during a regular session.
Three months later, Annyka became the youngest-ever MOKA awardee, one of the highligts of the Pampanga founding day celebrations led by the governor and her son, Vice Gov.
Dennis Pineda.
Asked about her award, Annyka said: 201cI was excited and happy because I was the youngest.201d
After setting iPhone record, Apple forecasts rare sales drop , After setting iPhone record, Apple forecasts rare sales drop 
FILE - In this Wednesday, Sept.
9, 2015, file photo, Apple CEO Tim Cook discusses the new iPhone 6s and iPhone 6s Plus during the Apple event at the Bill Graham Civic Auditorium in San Francisco.
Most analysts believe Apple surpassed its own record by selling more than 74.5 million iPhones in the final three months of 2015.
But there are signs that iPhone sales in the first three months of 2016 will show an abrupt decline from the same period a year earlier.

SAN FRANCISCO 2014 Apple is bracing for its first sales decline in 13 years, despite selling a record 74.8 million iPhones in the final three months of 2015, in what may prove to be a turning point for the world's most valuable company.
The tech giant says revenue could fall at least 8.6 percent during the January-March quarter, compared with a year earlier.
Analysts say the latest iPhone models aren't providing the boost Apple needs to match the massive sales growth it enjoyed last year.
Apple executives painted the downturn as a momentary hiccup.
But they also acknowledged the company is working to broaden its business beyond the iPhone itself, which in recent years has provided the bulk of Apple's revenue.
"We have become more and more of a platform company," Chief Financial Officer Luca Maestri told The Associated Press.
He said Apple has a large base of customers 2014 with 1 billion Apple devices now in active use 2014 who can be relied on to purchase new Apple gadgets, mobile apps and services like Apple Music.
Reporting on its financial performance in the December quarter, Apple said it managed to inch past its previous record, established when it sold 74.5 million iPhones in the holiday quarter of 2014.
But Tuesday's forecast implies Apple doesn't expect to match the 61 million iPhones sold in last year's January-March quarter.
Apple's stock has been in a slump for months, as investors worry the company won't be able to duplicate last year's growth in sales, which were in the double-digit percentages.
Tuesday's report confirmed those fears.
Executives blamed a strong dollar for reducing revenue from overseas sales in the December quarter.
Apple is also confronting an economic downturn in China, one of its biggest markets.
"We're seeing extreme conditions, unlike anything we've experienced before, just about everywhere we look," CEO Tim Cook told analysts on a conference call.
But researchers also say global demand for new smartphones has been slowing over the last year.
Apple relies on the iPhone for two-thirds of its revenue and a similar share of profit.
The giant tech company is in no financial danger.
It earned $18.4 billion in profit for the October-December quarter, ending the period with $216 billion in cash.
Cook called it "the mother of all balance sheets."
Profit rose 1.8 percent from a year earlier, while revenue increased 1.7 percent to $75.9 billion.
Earnings amounted to $3.28 a share, which beat the $3.23 average forecast among analysts surveyed by FactSet.
Revenue fell short of analysts' estimates, which averaged $76.7 billion.
No one expects Apple to match those results in the current, January-March quarter, as sales traditionally drop after the holiday shopping season and the introduction of new models.
But Apple's forecast, which calls for revenue between $50 billion and $53 billion in the current period, was lower than analysts expected and a significant drop from the $58 billion in sales Apple reported a year earlier.
That would be Apple's first year-over-year sales decline since the January-March quarter of 2003 2014 long before the company began selling iPhones and iPads.
Back then, Apple was a fraction of its current size, reporting quarterly revenue of just $1.45 billion.
While the iPhone has been a phenomenal success, analysts say it's difficult to match the sales surge that Apple enjoyed last year after it introduced the first iPhone models with significantly larger screens to compete with big-screen phones from rivals like Samsung, which were hugely popular in Asia.
Analysts say last September's release of two more big-screen phones, the iPhone 6S and 6S Plus, made less of a splash because they were viewed as relatively similar to the previous models, despite some new features.
Analysts say the slight increase in sales for the December quarter came in part because Apple began selling the newest models several days earlier in key markets such as China.
Apple is expected to release the next iPhone models, with new features, later this year.
That could fuel another surge in sales.
Along with first-time buyers and people who switch from competitors' phones, analysts say Apple can count on a loyal base of iPhone owners who will buy a new model every two years or so.
Maestri also cited $5.5 billion in revenue the company collected from sales of apps and services in the last quarter 2014 a 15 percent increase from a year earlier.
Skeptics, however, note that Apple hasn't come up with a blockbuster product to replace the iPhone.
The company's latest report showed sales of Mac computers and iPads both declined in the previous quarter.
At least for now, Apple "continues to be dominated by the iPhone and that will certainly, in the near run, continue to dictate the company's prospects," said analyst Bill Kreher of the Edward Jones investment firm.
Over the longer term, he said, revenue from apps and services, along with new products like the Apple Watch, "will be critical as the company attempts to re-ignite growth." 
Sun.Star Baguio publisher inducted as Asean JCI Senate prexy, Sun.Star Baguio publisher inducted as Asean JCI Senate prexy
BAGUIO.
The 16th ASSEAN President shall be our very own Baguio boy, JCI Sen.
Reynaldo C.
Bautista, to be inducted by 1985 Past JCI World President JCI Sen.
Victor Luciano.

SUN.STAR Baguio publisher Reynaldo Bautista Sr., a teacher and businessman from Baguio City, will be inducted by former Clark Development Corporation Executive vice president and former Clark International Airport Corporation  president and CEO Victor Jose Luciano January 29 in Marikina City as president of the Association of JCI  Senate of Southeast Asian Nations .
Luciano, the fourth Filipino JCI World President in 1985 whose exceptional contribution to the airline industry through his leadership with Transnational air Services Corporation, Asiana Philippines, GSA Inc.
 enabled him to bring his outstanding experience and skills to give recognition to the CIAC, will lead the installation rites of Bautista and the new set of officers who will serve for a year ending in January 2017.
The other officers are: George Chou , deputy president;  Patricia Poh, VP for Malaysia; Ivy Stanislaus, VP for Singapore; Lincoln Vu Giao Long, VP Vietnam; Denny Tumiwa, VP for Indonesia; Johnny Domino, VP for the Philippines; Rogelio Garcia, general legal counsel; Ma.
Elizabeth Calalo, secretary general; Olive Hukom and Nancy Iris, deputy SecGen; Nelson Tan , treasurer with Charter President Rene Florencio and Douglas Nazareno as senior advisers.
Bautista, who was elected into office during the fourth quarter board meeting of the ASSEAN in Dalat, Vietnam in November, 2015, will lead the 15-year-old organization, which was formed to create linkage among like-minded Jaycee Senators from the Asean region.
Bautista, who had been active in the JCI since his membership in 1965, said he hopes to further strengthen the ASSEAN, which at present is active in Vietnam, Singapore, Malaysia, Indonesia and the Philippines.
He hopes to revive the chapter in Thailand and Cambodia and open the chapters in Laos and Brunei.
 
Dr.
Krassae Chanawongse, Asean Disaster Preparedness Center  chairman, a Ramon Magsaysay awardee for community service and a JCI senator in Thailand, will also witness the induction as a show of support to the thrust of reviving the Thailand chapter.
                           
Bautista served as president of the Baguio JCI in 1968, North Luzon region head in 1969 and the national president of the Philippine JCI senate in 1985.
He said his presidency will focus on the theme of the fifth tenet of the JCI Creed, which states that 201cHumanity is the best work of life201d and will specifically work on the sub theme of Asean community integration.
Bautista, a known civic worker who at the age of 75 continues to take on an active role in community service, is the chairman of the Board of the Center for Educational Measurement , vice chairman of the Private Education Retirement and Annuity Association .
He was former president and chairman of the Board of the University of Baguio.
He served the 35-year-old Jaime V.
Ongpin Foundation , a multi-awarded and reliable foundation involved in creating resilient communities through nurturing of environmental capacities and helps uplift the quality of life through programs that preserve ecological integrity and enable access to economic resources, for over 30 years.
He also served the Luke Foundation , a 30-year-old civic oriented group focused on sight-saving.
Bautista was also co-chairman of the Alay Sa Kalinisan Inc.
 for many years.
ASKI is a multi-sectoral group formed with the City Government after the earthquake to help rebuild the city by cleaning.
It was instrumental in the city2019s Hall of Fame award as the country2019s cleanest and greenest highly urbanized city.
Taking a cue from the thrusts by which the ASSEAN was formed in 1990 and registered in the year 2000, Bautista said the group is evolving from a networking group of Jaycees Senators to becoming a promoter of Asean tourism, anchored on fellowship and friendship.
Rene Florencio, ASSEAN charter president, recalled it was in 1990 when groups of Jaycee Senators from Malaysia and the Philippines met and started a journey of friendship that eventually brought along like-minded Jaycee Senators from Thailand, Singapore and Indonesia.
Fifteen years after it was registered, Florencio said 201cwe now have seven country members 2013 two more from the original five.
Adopting the Asean community integration concept, he said many of the members have travelled to the major tourist destinations in member countries.
He added, "We have started to link-up with Jaycee Senator groups from Europe, South America, Mongolia, and others," letting them know what the Asean can offer in terms of tourism.

Facebook to expand beyond its 2018like2019 button 2018pretty soon2019 , Facebook to expand beyond its 2018like2019 button 2018pretty soon2019 
In this Dec.
13, 2011 file photo, a sign with Facebook2019s 201cLike201d logo is posted at Facebook headquarters near the office for the company's User Operations Safety Team in Menlo Park, Calif.

SAN FRANCISCO -- It won2019t be long before Facebook2019s 1.6 billion users have more ways to quickly express their feelings on the world's largest social network.
After four months of testing outside the U.S., Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg says that 201cpretty soon201d six new emotions will be added to the social network throughout the world.
Zuckerberg didn2019t give a more concrete timetable while discussing the new feature with analysts in a conference call Wednesday following Facebook's latest quarterly earnings report.
The additional options will expand Facebook beyond the renowned thumbs-up symbol that people click on to show they like a comment, photo or video posted on the social network.
The new reactions will include symbols for 201cangry,201d 201csad,201d 201cwow,201d 201chaha,201d 201cyay,201d and 201clove.201d
201cWe want people to be able to share all of the things that are meaningful to them, not just the things that are happy and that people are going to like when they see it,201d Zuckerberg said Wednesday.
Facebook is hoping the additional choices will encourage people to share their thoughts more frequently and hang out on the social network for even longer periods than they already do.
Facebook has been testing the different reactions in Chile, the Philippines, Portugal, Ireland, Spain, Japan and Colombia.
Zuckerberg said Facebook2019s engineers still need to make a few more 201ctweaks201d before the new options are offered in other parts of the world.

Sundance films take on mass shootings and guns in America , Sundance films take on mass shootings and guns in America PARK CITY, Utah -- Gun violence was on the minds of more than a few filmmakers this year.
The ongoing issue was the main subject of four new films at the Sundance Film Festival 2014 two feature documentaries  one short documentary, 201cSpeaking is Difficult,201d and one feature, 201cDark Night.201d
The wave of films dealing with essentially the same subject 2014 mass shootings in America 2014 is both a coincidence and an indicator that the filmmaking community is engaging with the national consciousness.
201cWe don2019t program films based on ideas we have of what issues we want to spark conversations about at the festival.
We respond to the films,201d said Trevor Groth, Sundance2019s director of programming.
201cThose films stood out to us because of the way they were made and the power within them.201d
Sundance founder Robert Redford echoed Groth2019s sentiments, joking that if they did seek out certain issues to spotlight, he2019d make sure there would be lots of environmentalist films.
But he also sees why the gun issue is so urgent for filmmakers.
201cGuns, of course, are a big issue,201d Redford said.
201cIt2019s not just going to sit there because the deaths keep coming.
It's going to keep rising up and rising up and it2019s going to get heated and I think there will be some resolve of some kind.
I think it's time."
201cSpeaking Is Difficult201d director AJ Schnack believes the multiple films were borne out of frustration and a feeling of powerlessness.
201cI think it2019s great that filmmakers are addressing this topic and are going to come at it from a bunch of different perspectives,201d Schnack said.
201cIt gives people permission to ignite those conversations in their communities and with their families and elected officials.201d
Here2019s a look at the various ways filmmakers tackled the subject:
NEWTOWN
Director Kim Snyder goes deep into the community of Newtown, Connecticut, in the aftermath of the Sandy Hook Elementary School shootings where 20 children and 6 educators were murdered.
In her documentary, Snyder explores the lives of those affected by the tragedy 2014 the parents of children who were killed, parents of children who survived, Sandy Hook teachers, local law enforcement, religious leaders, and even a volunteer EMT.
201cI didn2019t really have any big agenda,201d Snyder said, other than showing the community truthfully.
201cBut, as  David Wheeler says, the people who have the most motivation to allow that intrusion of a camera are people who, as he said, feel compelled to say something or do something that might prevent another town or family from having to go through this.201d
DARK NIGHT
201cDark Night201d is the sole narrative feature in the bunch, and deals with a mass shooting in a Florida suburb.
The not-so-oblique title references the Aurora, Colorado, massacre of 2012 during a midnight screening of 201cThe Dark Knight Rises.201d
201cIt starts with the massacre in Aurora,201d director Tim Sutton said.
201cThere was something that happened to the movie theater that day.
The movie theater became unsafe.
It became corrupted, possibly forever.
I felt as a filmmaker a responsibility to try to touch on this theme.201d
UNDER THE GUN
Katie Couric and director Stephanie Soechtig  returned to Sundance with a sweeping overview of guns in America 2014 melding jaw-dropping stats , historical perspective , and emotional accounts from the families of the deceased .
They also speak to a variety of pro-gun advocates, from those who support background checks to those who scoff at the idea.
201cEven people who2019ve been immersed in this issue for years told us they learned some things from the film,201d Couric said.
201cI was surprised how the NRA2019s tentacles spread so far and wide and how the organization has its finger prints on so many things.201d
SPEAKING IS DIFFICULT
201cSpeaking is Difficult201d may never be finished.
The short documentary is a living film, meaning every time there is another mass shooting, director AJ Schnack and his team will update it.
He2019d submitted a rough cut of the film to Sundance months ago and had to update it twice since then as new events occurred.
Schnack2019s film shows the locations of the shootings, as they exist now, overlaid with 911 calls from the event.
201cIt2019s becoming almost a ritual where an event happens, there is a level of outrage for a few days and then as it gets further away it recedes and we go through it again,201d Schnack said.
201cThe events were starting to become like echoes of previous events.201d
Schnack found the now-normalcy of the settings quite striking.
201cA lot of the locations have returned to being the same place 2014 a restaurant, a salon, a school,201d he said.
201cPeople walk past as if nothing has happened.201d 
Unesco World Heritage Sites under threat around the world , Unesco World Heritage Sites under threat around the world 
In this March 4, 2011, file photo, men ride in a boat across the Mekong River in Luang Prabang, Laos.
It is officially described as the best-preserved city in Southeast Asia, a bygone seat of kings tucked into a remote river valley of Laos.

LUANG PRABANG -- A number of Unesco's World Heritage Sites face major challenges, including the following:
Machu Picchu, Peru
This magnificent "lost city of the Incas" is cited by Unesco as beset by logging, poor waste management and agricultural incursion but hasn't been placed on its list of sites in danger.
Peruvian experts are raising other alarm bells, from vehicle fumes to the unceasing tread of footsteps producing a similar effect as a small-scale earthquake that could lead to collapse of the temples and other structures.
The number of visitors 2014 nearly 2,500 daily 2014appears to be overwhelming the site's safe carrying capacity.
The 15th century royal retreat was built high up in the Peruvian Andes to accommodate a population estimated at no more than 800.
Omori, Japan
This sleepy western Japanese town had "no outstanding universal value," according to the International Council on Monuments and Sites, which makes recommendations on world heritage sites.
Its only attraction was a long defunct silver mine and no tourist infrastructure existed aside from one eight-room guesthouse.
But following intense lobbying by Japanese authorities, Omori was inscribed in 2007.
A year later, almost 1 million tourists poured in, rupturing the quiet lifestyle of the unprepared community.
Another controversial site in Japan was added to Unesco's roster last year: factories and mines of the country's Meiji Industrial Revolution.
Tens of thousands of Koreans, Chinese and Allied prisoners of war were forced to work at some of the locations, prompting Chinese media to charge the listing "helped Japan cover up or glorify some of its past wartime atrocities." South Korea demanded that Japan make it clear that South Korean slave labor was used.
Lijiang, China
Amid widespread publicity, the 800-year-old town in China's southern province of Yunnan was declared a site in 1997, and is today one of the country's top domestic tourist destinations.
Outsiders with more capital and skills moved in, sparking tensions with mostly ethnic minority residents who felt they were "losing their town." Already in the early 2000s, many streets of the old quarter were up to 90 percent in the hands of newcomers profiting by the mass influx.
Annual visitors swelled from some 150,000 before the heritage designation to 2.8 million three years later and some 16 million last year.
Local culture has been adulterated in a complete tourism-oriented make-over.
The charming houses are reproductions: Virtually the entire old town was razed by a 1996 earthquake.
Mont Saint-Michel, France
This offshore islet topped by a stunning 8th century Benedictine abbey was France's first heritage site and among the first ever designated.
Already a major pilgrimage destination in the Middle Ages, it underwent many transformations but has always drawn romantics and the faithful, even when it served as a prison during the French Revolution.
With a resident population of about 50 and only 247 acres  in size, it now attracts up to 2.8 million visitors a year.
The Smithsonian Magazine wrote that its narrow, medieval streets are packed with tourists "who shoulder to shoulder, four to five thick, mill about like subway commuters at rush hour along the main street, which is nonstop cafes, hotels, restaurants and shops, selling every kind of souvenir imaginable." 
51st IEC message and homily of Papal legate Charles Cardinal Bo, 51st IEC message and homily of Papal legate Charles Cardinal Bo
Papal legate Charles Cardinal Bo 
Opening Mass of the 51st International Eucharistic CongressCebu City Plaza IndependenciaJanuary 24, 2016 | 4 p.m.
Ako ay masaya na makarating dito sa Cebu!
I stand on this holy ground, full of gratitude and joy, bringing the message of hope and joy from the prophet of the millennium, our  dear Holy Father Francis.
Pope Francis loves you very much!
Ang atong San Padre gihigugma kamong tanan!
Kayong lahat ay mahal na mahal ng Santo Padre!
We are grateful today.
Gratitude to God that an event of immense significance as this International Eucharistic Congress has brought together the Catholic Church to the cradle of Catholic Faith in Philippines, Cebu.
I am grateful to Our Holy Father for his trust and the honor he bestowed your humble servant to be the legate.
I am grateful to the warm welcome, the deep communion we feel as Catholics all over the world.
I am humbled and grateful to this opportunity to be with you.
You are a great nation, the light to Asia, the biggest Catholic Community in Asia.
This pivotal Catholic Nation that has promoted the growth of Catholicism in Asia.
Your light has shown in every part of the world through your sons and daughters whose exemplary faith has been for ages, the beacon of evangelization.
In some parts of the world, Catholicism means Filipino presence.
Every migrant working from Philippines is a Paul of Tarsus in more than 120 countries they serve.
Sa Hong Kong, London, sa Cairo, sa Roma, sa Dubai
Ang Pilipino ay nasa lupa.
Ang Pilipino ay nasa hangin.
Ang Pilipino ay nasa tubig.
Nasa lahat ng dako ang dugong Pilipino!
For the last five decades, the only place that welcomed our priests, religious and laity with open arms and cared for them is you and the Church in the Philippines.
Today, Myanmar church is a confident church, your communion was a poignant show of Eucharistic fellowship with a suffering church.
You have shared the bread of hospitality, the bread of knowledge, the bread of your love for the people who came here.
We are gathered on a global stage, a global table, for a Cosmic Eucharist,  Eucharist as a Mission in Cebu! You are the door of Christianity to this great nation.
After a week-long celebration of Senor Santo Ni\xf1o de Cebu, you have gathered here, commemorating 500 jubilee of the arrival of faith with the people and after 79 years of a Eucharistic congress in this great land of faith, you have come forward to celebrate this global fellowship.
The theme: The Christ in you is the Hope of Glory - taken from Colossians is a theme that echoes through your mountains, through your beautiful rivers, soothes the heart of millions of Filipinos.
This is a historic moment.
God gave you a nation of unparalleled beauty, but sadly challenged with the frequent natural disasters.
your beloved Bishop Claver, SJ once said that the Philippines has the unenviable title of being the disaster capital of the world, but time and again, you have proved your resilience, your faith, rising from all challenges.
May this 51st IEC be the moment of healing the earth, the wounded planet, and healing the graceful people of this country and everyone gathered here.
You have wisely chosen a theme of timeless relevance: Christ in you is the Hope of Glory - the Eucharist - the source and Goal of Mission.
This theme assigns three tasks: 
1.
To promote awareness of the central place of the Eucharist in life and mission.
2.
To help improve our understanding and celebration of Eucharist liturgy.
3.
To draw attention to the social dimension of the Eucharist.
Eucharist: The Treasure of Faith for Christians
Five hundred years ago, Christianity entered this land as a treasure, a command to be executed, a promise to be repeated, a mission to be fulfilled.
But the treasure of faith started with a few simple sentences: "You shall love God and your neighbor as yourself.
What shall it profit a man if he gains the whole world, but loses his soul? God loves this world and he gave his only son, not to condemn, but to redeem.
You are Peter and on this rock I will build my church."
But all of these words, a short sentence, changed history.
They are the words:
TAKE AND EAT, THIS IS MY BODY! TAKE AND DRINK, THIS IS MY BLOOD!
Yes.
The most powerful words in the human history, the most powerful words in the dialogue of God with man.
The powerful words by which the world is nourished today.
Mother church has cut these verbal diamond into a single word: EUCHARIST.
Thomas Aquinas summed up the centrality of the Eucharist for us with the great lyrical
praise:
O Sacred Banquet in which Christ is received; the memory of his Passion renewed.
The mind filled with grace, and a pledge of future glory to us is given.

Alleluia!
Eucharist is the spiritual jewel.
Any jewel needs to be seen in various angles and lights.
We are fortunate to gather these days through seminars and gatherings to see its various splendor.
The Eucharist encompasses various facets of Christian life.
Vatican II tells us that the Eucharist is the "source and summit of the Christian life." 
This mystery of the Eucharist has two eyes: the Presence and the Mission.
PRESENCE - the quest of Human dignity - Man in God's Image.
Eucharist is a historic faith event.
Eucharist is the presence of Jesus.
It is the same Lord of Moses, Abraham and Isaac.

It is the same Lord who through the Paschal meal liberated the Israelites from slavery, through his son, the Paschal lamb extends to the WHOLE humanity.
The gift of redemption and salvation.
The celebration of Eucharist and its adoration continue to affirm that the work of liberation and redemption is not yet over.
We adore Jesus in the sacrament of the most Holy.
In our personal moments with him, in our solemn benedictions and in our adoration chapels, the Presence of Christ continues to be adored.
The Eucharist and adoration is the intense faith encounter with Jesus, But this encounter needs others, the community.
It was Mother Teresa who contemplated this mystery of Presence.
She says "every Holy Communion fills us with Jesus and we must go in haste to give him to others." Mother Mary, whose body became the first altar of the Eucharist, Jesus, when she was conceived with him, the Bible says, she rushed in haste to meet Elizabeth.
Adoring Jesus in the Eucharist is also accepting our fellow men and women as created in the image of God.
In a world that kills children in the womb, I a world that spends more on arms than on food, in a world that continues to have millions of poor, Eucharist is a major challenge to the whole humanity.
Can we feel the presence of God in our brothers and sisters? Pope John Paul talked about the culture of death.
Pope Francis spoke of a culture of indifference.
Eucharist then, cries out from the womb to tomb human dignity.
Abortion, death penalty, euthanasia, etc.
are vital challenge to Eucharist today.
Our adoration of Eucharist affirms our unalienable faith in human dignity.
Governments and others need to appreciate our faith vision.
So millions of Catholics attend mass, adore the sacrament.
As we gather, not only the bread on the altar becomes the body of Christ.
Each one of us is joined with our brothers and sisters as one body "We, though many, are one body .
The great awareness brings us to the first great task: Eucharist and Mission."
1.
From Eucharistic Celebration to Eucharistic Commitment - Mission
Adoration alone may make us good devotees.
But being a devotee in one of the easiest things.
Debosyon sa Santo Ninyo, Debosyon kay Hesus Nazareno.
It is good.
Christ is calling us to be disciples, to carry his cross; the Mass of the devotee ends in an hour.
But the Mass of the disciple is unending.
The Eucharist of the devotee is confined to the clean, decorated altars of the church.
The Eucharist of the disciple continues with the streets as altar.

Christ died in the street, dragged on the streets, proclaimed his good news on the streets, and affirmed the human dignity in the streets.
His altar was the world, He broke the bread of healing, He broke the bread of feeding, He broke the bread of reconciling, He broke the bread of Good News.
His disciples carried the task.
The very act of Eucharistic assembly was revolutionary in the Act of the Apostles.
The first disciples were martyred for the act of coming together and breaking of the bread.
John Paul said, "It is the impulse which the Eucharistic gives to the community for a practical commitment to building amore just and fraternal society".
.
Pope Benedict in: SACRAMENT CARITATIS 2007 says, "Personal encounter with the Lord occurs in the Eucharisti.
And this is preciously the personal encounter with the Lord that strengthens the mission contained in the Eucharist."
Yes, Eucharist leads us to mission.
What is the mission? Vatican II defines the three fold mission of Christian - in the Ws: Word, Worship, and Witness.
The first W is knowing the word of God and Proclaiming the Good News, The second is the worshipping as a community, affirming the oneness of the Christian community in the image of the triune God as the first Christians did, the third is the Witnessing through social mission with our concern for the weak and the vulnerable, what Pope Francis calls the "view from the margin".
That brings us to the next important role of the Eucharist:
2.
Eucharist and the Poor
Once a priest told me uttering the consecration words in the Mass was becoming very difficult.
The words "Take and Eat" are very difficult for me, he said.
He was living in a place affected by war and displacement and food was hard to come by.
He was reminded by his people's hungerand difficulty in uttering the words by Jesus.
Yes we break bread in an unjust world.
Unicef says everyday 20,000 children die of starvation and malnutrition.
That is 900,000 every month and 10 million a year.
A silent genocide, the biggest terrorism in the world; what is the greatest moral sin that seeing a child dying of starvation today?
The Eucharist and the poor are inseparable.
It was the church Father John Chrysostom who said "Do you wish to honor the body of Christ? Do not ignore him when he is naked.
He who said 'this is my Body' is the same who said: You saw me hungry and you gave me food." Mother Teresa advised her sisters: The love for the Eucharist helps us to love the poor.
Be the love, the compassion, the presence to the poor.
Eucharist is a dream and a reality because Jesus is truly present.
A dream because it is the hope of the future, the eschatological meal of human equality.
Today you have gathered from various backgrounds, the rich and poor, the noble and peasant, aristocrat and the servant.
But when you approach the altar, the Eucharist strips you off all your social status.

You are just an equal among equal.
In an unequal and uncaring world, the Eucharist steadfastly remains the beacon of human equality.
The Eucharist calls us to justice.
No other religion elevates justice to this level.
No other religion elevates the poor to this level as Mary narrates after the word was flesh in her "the mighty will be brought down and the lowly will be raised up."
This calls for our commitment to a world of justice.
Eucharist calls for a third world war, a third world war against poverty.
A third world war against the cruelty of dogs fed with sumptuous organic food while poor children scramble for crumbs from the table, a third world war against a world that produces more weapons whilst more than half a billion do not get enough food every day.
Despite this happening, the Eucharist will remain a revolutionary flag hoisted everyday on millions of altars, crying for justice like the prophets of old.
"The real fasting I need is the breaking the chains of injustice, remove the yolk of oppression, share the food with the hungry, sheltering the homeless" .
This country's urgent task is to fulfill the prophecy.
This biggest Catholic country in Asia needs to declare a war that fights for thousands who are still in poverty and forces them to unsafe migration.
The economic injustice and the environmental injustice penetrated with impunity in this country and elsewhere make our Eucharistic celebrations vulnerable to prophetic attacks.
"I do not look at your communion sacrifices; spare me the noise of your chanting, let me not hear your strumming of lyres; let justice and righteousness flow like a never failing stream.

This I think is the clarion call to mission today for all of us who attended this congress.
Another world is possible.
An economic system that does not treat human beings as commodities is possible, another world where the world is our common home is possible.
Until that happens, the Eucharist will continue to be challenged.
Our mission remains incomplete.
3.
Eucharist as the healing Power for Unity
We are journeying through uneasy times.
Hatred based on religion and culture is expanding.
Being Christian is such a risk today.
"Take the cup; this is my blood" is not just Eucharistic words.
It is true in the lives of many Christians today.
Not only Christians, the country from where I come from faced war and conflict for the last sixty years.
The world is fragmented.
Humanity is soaked in tears and blood today.
Cain continues his hatred for his brother.
Christianity offered a new version of humanity through Eucharist.
Before the Passover meal, Christ offered an example of service, washing the feet of his disciples.
Instead of killing a scapegoat, Christ became the lamb of God.
He exhorted, "Pray for those who persecute you." He forgave from the Cross.
The Eucharist remains a sign of hope for humanity.
The community life of the first Christians were such an inspiring fellowship.
 Breaking of the bread was a spiritual experience, but it was also a political statement in a colonized Israel, fragmented as Romans, Pharisees and the poor.
Paul could boast "In Christ there is neither Jew nor Gentiles, neither slave nor free nor there is male and female, for you are all one in Christ" .
Reality is different but God is the same.
Paul once again defines Eucharist as: The bread is one though we are many, we share one body.

Nanginahanglan kamo og kalinaw.
Nanginahanglan ako og kalinaw.
Nanginahanglan kitang tanan og kalinaw.
Ang bansang Pilipinas ay nangangailangan ng kapayapaan!
Ang mundo ay nangangailangan ng kapayapaan!
Let this Congress set in motion a movement for reconciliation.
The Eucharist is always preceded by reconciliation.
The gospel of Matthew stipulates the condition for a true reconciliation: "If therefore you are presenting your offering at the altar, and there remember that your brother has something against you, leave your offering there before the altar, and go your way; first be reconciled to your brother, and then come and present your offering.
.
Christians need to pray with St.
Francis of Assisi "Make me a channel of Peace, where there is hatred let me sow love".
This unity and reconciliation need to start with our families, our parishes and communities, among religions.
Blessed are the peace makers .
Peace is the bread that the Catholic Community waits to share with all communities.
This Congress highlights the presence of God through our veneration to the Eucharist.
This Eucharistic Congress, held in this great city and a great country, make us move from Eucharistic celebration to Eucharistic commitment in promoting the Eucharist as a mission, the Eucharist as the bread of justice to the poor, the Eucharist as the bread of peace in conflict areas.
God bless you.
Palihog i-ampo ninyo ako!
Insights: "We are at war!" , Insights: "We are at war!" 
DAVAO.
Editors and reporters of Sun.Star Davao and Sun.Star SuperBalita pledge to abide by the Sun.Star Code of Ethics and Standards before before Municipal Trial Court in Cities  Branch 7 Judge Rufino S.
Ferraris during Sun.Star2019s annual convocation.
Sun.Star editorial staff members renew their vows every January, to constantly be reminded to uphold ethical journalism.

Seth delos Reyes, SUN.STAR Davao family though ranked No.1 among other newspapers in the region is not complacent about its achievements.
We declare war not against any other newspapers in the city but first and foremost, ourselves, as we strive to be better than how we were before and to sustain our credibility.
 
Sun.Star Davao and Sun Star SuperBalita editorial staff members led by editor-in-chief Stella A.
Estremera and managing editor Alger Dura on Friday reaffirmed our oath to abide by the Sun.Star Code of Standards and Ethics, follow the rules to become professional, ethical and authentic journalist.
The oath was officiated by Judge Rufino S.
Ferraris.
 
Based on a survey data by Ateneo de Davao University Social Resarch Training and Development Office last year Sun.Star Davao and Sun Star SuperBalita got 72.1 percent in readership across all ages in the city and the remaining parcel is divided among other local dailies in Davao.
The challenge is great and the fight is tough as it is said that man's greatest enemy to beat is no other than himself.

As members of the Sun.Star family, we join the call to war to deliver what the public deserves: information that is verified, analyzed, and actionable.
 
Topnotch nurse  , Topnotch nurse  Rhona Goc-ong-Villariasa, THE job of a nurse is not for everyone.
It takes strength, intelligence, endurance, but most of all, compassion to take on the ills of the world with passion and purpose.
 
The job will drain your time, much more your energy, but for this lady, she considers it a privilege to be of service to humankind when they are in most need.
 
Thessa Ville L.
Miro, grew up idolizing a nurse.
She saw how compassionate the nurses who took good care of her grandparents when she was still young.
 
After finishing her secondary years, Thessa enrolled at Davao Medical School Foundation Inc.
to fulfill her dream.
Thessa graduated with honors.
 
Her dedication and sacrifice all paid off, especially when she learned that she is one of the 7th placer at the Nursing Board Exams that was held November 29 to 30 last year.
 
Just January 8 this year, the Professional Regulation Commission  here announced that from the 18,500 who took the exam from different areas here in the country, only 9,114 made it to the list of passers.
 
"Di ko talaga i-nexpect na makasali pa sa top 10.
Though goal talagang family ko na I'll be included sa top-notchers pero after sa exam I told them na wag ng mag-expect talaga kasi sobrang hirap talaga," says Thessa in an interview.
 
The eldest from three siblings, Thessa added that June last year after her graduation she immediately started her review.
 
"Bale April 2015 ako nag-graduate then diretso sa review sa Merge Davao Review Center for 6 months.
Feel ko sa review ang dami kung natutunan pero sa exams, nasabi ko talaga, kasali ba to sa review? Seguro dahil stress narin ako masyado.
Sinabi ko nalang 201cBahala na si Lord kung makapasa," the 21-year old registered nurse said, who was born July 23, 1994.
 
The studious daughter of Leo and Elvie, who are both medical technologist also admitted that at times that she's down and puzzled she holds on to her family, who never ceases to remind her not to easily give up.
 
"What I'm doing is I just pray, talk to my family, nakikipaglaro with my siblings para ma-relax kasi talagang dumadating ka sa time na dahil sa pressure sa review sobra parang i-de-drain lahat ng energy mo."  
As part of her review technique, Thessa filled her rooms with review notes that she can glance at while resting.
 
"Yung room ko puno ng sulat.
Kahit saan ka tumingin may mababasa ka.
Parang strategy ko narin na kahit I'm not reading the book, titingin lang ako sa paligid may nababasa ako."  
Thessa who also loves to write poems about family and environment describes herself as loving, ambitious, and God-fearing.
 
She added that after passing the nursing board exam, she will spent time to serve here and her alma mater.
 
With the success she got, the registered nurse is very much thankful to her family, to her school and to herself.
 
"To my family thank you for inspiring me to push harder.
To my school, thanks for being a great foundation of knowledge and lastly to myself, Thessa, thank for working hard, you make me proud."  
For now, Thessa is excited to extend her care and compassion to her patients.
It may be a hard and draining job, but for the newbie health professional she is more excited to draw a smile to her patients smile and cheer them despite of their condition.

Preventing runoff thru contouring, Preventing runoff thru contouringKarina V.
Canedo, CORN, a cash crop cultivate by most farmers, is notorious for turning sloping lands into barren fields after several planting season when farmers do not know technologies that will prevent the runoff and consequent erosion of the topsoil.
With the strong El Nino resulting in months of no rain, the topsoil will be all dried up now and once the rain returns, all these will be flushed down the slopes if farmers persist with their conventional technique of just planting on the slopes without studying the contour.
With the advent of new technologies for corn production comes also cultivation of sloping areas to meet the crop demands, and with such demand comes the adverse effect of land degradation and soil erosion that can only be replenish for a long time.
To help farmers understand the importance of the top soil on corn and why they should ensure that this is not washed off when it rains, the Sustainable Corn Production for sloping areas  was crafted and developed by the Department of Agriculture to benefit not just the farmers but also teach them sustainable land use management.
Scopsa features easily adaptable and soil and water conservation technologies focused on soil erosion control and gully stabilization in combination with the soil fertilization.
Established in Davao region in year 2013, Scopsa is anchored on the restoring ecological balance in sloping areas adapting different planting strategies, crop rotation and contouring practices in the sloping areas.
It is mainly focused on corn mono-cropping and the use of contouring practices in the sloping areas.
Agriculturist of Department of Agriculture Regional Davao Field Operations Division Joedel Leliza said that this is project was introduced for corn.
201cThe technology is focused on corn, it is mono cropping and we still use the contouring.
The contour is still the same, there is also an A frame used, but it is sustainable in a sense that as we harvest the corn we do not destroy the physical features of land because through it no siltation can happen because it is blocked by barriers),201d Leliza said, comparing Scopsa to Sloping Agricuture Land Technology or Salt, which was developed in the 1970s in Bansalan, Davao del Sur.

In Davao Region, the two pilot areas for Scopsa are in Buda in Davao City, and New Corella in Davao del Norte.
The Scopsa project starts with sharing the technology and information to farmers through capacity-building activities.
The farmers who make it past these activities are then encouraged to establish their own techno-demo farm.
The budget for this program is very small compared to other agricultural programs, reaching ony P200,000 that are used for the briefings, distribution of hedgerows, and corn seeds.
201cIt2019s not costly because the farms are already planted with corn and the farmers will just be made to understand how to use an A-frame to stake out the contours of the sloping land,201d she said.
An 201cA frame201d is a simple tool made from wood or bamboo for laying out the contour lines across the slope.

The pieces of wood or bamboo are nailed or tied together to form an A shape.
With a stone used as plumb hung on the A-frame, the farmer can then stake out the areas on the same contour.
Contouring or making terrace-like levels is important in sloping lands to stave erosion.
Along the contour lines will be planted with hedgerows or leguminous crops, which can grow roots that dig deep into the earth and thus discourage erosion.
Leliza said that once contour placements are set, in between the contour, it is where the corn will be planted and within the contour area, the hedgerows or leguminous crops.
201cOnce it rains, the runoff will go toward the rinsoni  and pile up there.
In around five years, this will already form layers of soil because these were not washed off by flood,201d she added.
Based on the copy of the protocol of the establishment of techo-demo farm for Scopsa, the most applicable vegetative means in mitigating erosion in sloping areas are buffer strip cropping or hedge grow intercropping which involves double row planting of nitrogen fixing trees or shrubs species  along the contour lines, and this system is only recommended to areas with less than 30 percent slope.
This kind of intercropping traps soil carried out by runoff thus gradually forming a natural terrace, its biomass serves as a green manure, source of fodder and firewood, furthermore hedgegrows improve soil structure and water infiltration.
Adoption of this technology is unpopular because hedgegrows occupy 25% of the farm, thereby reducing areas of cultivation and income for small farmers.
One option is to use income generating crops .
Another good alternative technology is Natural Vegitative Strips  or grass strips.
These strips are naturally growing grasses and herbs intentionally left uplowed along the contour of the sloping land.
Other natural vegetative measures include modified hedgerow or buffer cropping system, which involved establishment of widely spaced line of permanent crops; improved multi-storey buffer strip cropping which entails using widely spaced single line of permanent crops or tree crops will be established along contours 12 meters apart.
Aside from natural vegetative measures agronomic and fertility improvement measures like countor tillage, crop rotation and crop residue management is also part of the SCoPSA.
Based on the project primer, assistance will be provided during the first year of the implementation , particularly planting materials for hedgerows , organic fertilizer and optional distribution of corn seeds.
The monitoring and evaluation of the project will be carried throughout the duration of the project and will be continued for at least 2 years of project maturity.
201cAt the moment, the land preparation had been done and they are waiting for the rain as the Davao Region is affected so they still cannot plant, we already got the contouring so farmers are ready to plant),201d Leliza said.
P248M crop damage, P248M crop damage
DAVAO.
A farmer drives a tractor that in rural areas is also used as cargo carrier, passenger vehicle, and all-around transport.
Many such tractors will be running empty as farms have been dried up due to the strong El Nino.

Ace June Rell S.
Perez, DAMAGE to agricultural crops in Davao Region due to the onslaught of El Nino phenomenon has reached P248.2 million as of December 11, 2015, the regional office of the Department of Agriculture  reported.
The figure is calculated from January of last year.
Of the figure, P140.2 million worth of damages are from rice, while the remaining P107.9 million are from corn.
That means, the small farming families, many of whom are now barely subsisting after their root crops were likewise destroyed, are not included in this list.
201cWe are expecting that this will continue as Philippine Atmospheric, Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration  forecasted that from January to April even until June, we will be experiencing below normal rainfall at 41 to 80 percent.
That is not enough water for the stable production of our staple crops such as rice and corn,201d Agriculturist II of the Field Operations, Joedel Leliza, told Sun.Star Davao in an interview.
Data from DA-Davao showed a total of 38,506.64 metric tons  of both rice and corn had been damaged, covering a total of 12,532.15 hectares.
       
Of the said figure, 1,035 hectares have been partially destroyed, while 12,854.16 has have been totally damaged, affecting thousands of rice and corn farmers in the region.
Davao del Sur is the hardest hit province in the rice sector with P84 million value loss, followed by Davao del Norte with P45.7 million, Davao City with P5.6 million, Compostela Valley with P4.4 million and Davao Oriental with P450,000.
For corn, Davao City recorded the highest loss of P61.6 million, followed by Davao Oriental with P26.2 million, Davao del Sur with P12.9 million, Compostela Valley with P3.8 million and Davao del Norte with P3.3 million.
       
When asked on the agency's intervention program, Leliza said that a total of P16 million budget was downloaded to the agriculture department last December of last year out of the P93 million requested special budget by DA for the intervention programs against El Nino.
201cFor 2016, we have identified programs as mitigating plans and measures for El Nino.
These are the distribution open surface pump facilities to affected areas, buffer stocking program, seeds, fertilizers, farm tractors, among others,201d Leliza said.
For corn, DA-Davao introduced to farmers the farming methodology called Sustainable Corn Production in Sloping Areas , 201ca program that is establish a techno-demo farm that will showcase easily adoptable and socially acceptable soil and water conservation conversation technologies focused on soil erosion control and gully stabilization in combination with soil fertility improvement.201d
201cThis is piloted in Region II, now in Davao region, we already have two sites here located Buda  and New Corella, Davao del Norte.
It is seen to increase farmer2019s income by at least 10 percent,201d Leliza said.
Masbad: Quick Three, Masbad: Quick ThreeRoark L.
Masbad, Wacky Tech, SHAMELESS plug to start this off.
Hahaha! 
I, finally, put my website back online.
It's www.wackymasbad.com.
There's not much in there yet except for the photos from our recent Batanes trip.
I'll be putting in more things in the coming months.
It'll be where I'll post mg travel photos, food photos, and, hopefully, reviews of gadgets and technology.

Anyway, moving forward.
This will be a quick one.
Again.
Three pieces of tech news that struck me the most this past week.
One.
Fast internet from Google using drones.
Now, that's something, ain't it? This could bring online connectivity to more rural areas around the world.
Find out more here: http://www.androidauthority.com/google-project-skybender-internet-drones...
Two.
"White Card" to replace all our credit cards and rewards cards.
One card to rule them all.
In a way, it's scary.
All your financial data stored in one single piece of device.
But the potential benefits might outweigh the cons.
It's a wait-and-see.
Read more here: http://mashable.com/2016/01/29/lg-pay-white-card/
Three.
Auto tweet your ISP when speeds go below what you should be getting.
I found this somewhat amusing story of a subscriber in the US where he setup a mechanism that will auto tweet his ISP.
Hold your horses for a bit there and start imagining if we could all set this up everytime out telcos fail to deliver the right speed we subscribed for.
Wouldn't that be glorious? Find out how here: http://thenextweb.com/shareables/2016/01/31/frustrated-comcast-customer-...
See you next week! Until then, do make sure you keep your digital data intact and backed up.

Cheers!
Master photographers shoot with Starmobile Knight, Master photographers shoot with Starmobile Knight
Jake Verzosa
PROVING that Filipino brands can also produce world-class quality and innovation, Starmobile has won over a discerning customer base with the introduction of the Knight Series.

The latest in the line-up, the Knight Spectra, features Starmobile's proprietary Star Cam technology and Dual Rear Camera, which enable users to take awesome photos by allowing them to refocus their images even after shooting, take pictures with the right exposure level even in low-light conditions, and zoom in on faraway subjects without compromising photo texture and sharpness.
The dual rear cameras work together to help users take breath-taking photos.
A 2MP sensor gathers data like light, exposure, and distance, acting as support to the 13MP main sensor that takes brilliant photos quickly and accurately.
Impressing some of the Philippines' most distinguished photographers
After experiencing the Knight Spectra firsthand, veteran lensman Jun De Leon, fashion photographer Jake Verzosa, musician Rico Blanco, and director and cinematographer JA Tadena have become passionate advocates, using the smartphone to capture stunning portraits and majestic scenery.
Continuing the Knight Series' award-winning streak
With features that have taken smartphone photography to new heights, the Knight Spectra was named by leading tech blog Unbox.ph as 2015's most innovative Filipino flagship phone and by GizGuide.ph as one of the top 10 smartphones of the year.

These accolades only continue the Knight Series' award-winning streak that started as soon as it launched in the Philippines in 2013.
The first Starmobile Knight immediately made a mark in the local market, with its beautiful build, solid battery life, and 18MP rear and 8MP front-facing cameras.
It went on to get recognition as the best Filipino flagship smartphone from Rappler.com, Unbox.ph, and TheTechnoclast.com.

Its successor, the Starmobile Knight X, was considered the most powerful Filipino Android smartphone of 2014, receiving praise as the best local flagship phone from Unbox.ph and as the most advanced Filipino smartphone from TechPinas.com.
Three other models introduced in 2015 strengthened the Knight Series' game-changing reputation.
The launch of the Knight Vision made Starmobile the first Filipino brand to incorporate cutting-edge Digital TV in its devices, enabling its users to watch and record their favourite TV shows even on the go.

Meanwhile, the thin but mean machine that is the Knight Luxe got a perfect 9/9 score from TV show GMA Pop Talk and was named as one of the top 10 smartphones of the year by technology reviewer DrOntheGo.net.

Lastly, the Corning Gorilla Glass-encased Knight Elite was recognized by TechPinas.com as the best designed smartphone under P10,000.
Gorilla Glass is a special type of scratch-resistant glass usually found in more expensive smartphones.
Be a shooting star with the Knight Series
Impress your loved ones with your photography skills while enjoying the speed, power, and craftsmanship of your Starmobile Knight smartphone.
The Knight Elite and Knight Spectra are both equipped with dual SIM slots, LTE connectivity, Qualcomm Snapdragon Octa Core CPU, and expandable memory.
 
For more information, visit www.starmobile.com.ph or go to Starmobile's official Facebook page at facebook.com/starmobilephones.

Grow your own, never go hungry  , Grow your own, never go hungry  Kriztja Marae G.
Labrador, CONCEPTUALIZED beginning from a problem of living in a big city, this system running for years now has continued to empower households in the country.

Urban Container Gardening  by Perfecto 201cJojo201d Rom is a food-production system wherein small spaces in the urban centers are being maximized to serve as a nutrition garden of a household by recycling old containers and re-using bio-waste materials as fertilizers.
Rom is a graduate of Bachelor of Science in Agriculture Major in Crop Science from Xavier University-Ateneo de Cagayan.

Inspired by the hanging gardens of Babylon by King Nebuchadnezzar, Rom had conceptualized the system in 2002, a year after he graduated, but applied it on 2006 upon moving here in Davao City living in an apartment.

201cI started with one pot using my daughter2019s empty can of milk,201d he said, with the desire to provide fresh vegetables to his family which he eventually began teaching others and advocating for democratized agriculture.

In the UCG system, Rom also integrated a resource dynamic flow in the UCG system that facilitates including the wasted time of the family into something productive.

A recent progress on the system is the 2018bio-filtering2019 of water which is used in UCG Aquaponic System which for Jojo2019s home is now on its 5th year.
Through 2018bio-filtering2019 the stagnant water still remained fresh and is now used as drinking water for his 60 heads native chicken.

201cThe Nutrient Cycle and Water Conservation in the set-up are effective as it sustains the Crops and Chicken Above the experimental batch of Pangasius Fish underneath,201d Rom said.

The 60 Chicken are regularly fed with Black Soldier Fly Larva thus we reduced our expenses on feeds, they remain healthy despite incidences of 2018New Castles Diseases  and Avian Cholera around.
The hens continue to lay eggs and we collect an average of 5 eggs a day.
With UCG, Rom and his family can save up to 12,000 per month on the cost of food preparation.

For the UCG, one of his first projects was the Post-Ondoy Livelihood Rehabilitation Project in Banaba, San Mateo, Rizal wherein UCG was made not only to solve the problem of food stability in the household level but also solved the problem in the community level through the Social Enterprise Capital Augmentation Program .

Last year Rom conducted training to Yolanda Survivors in Biliran, Island Province of Biliran.
201cI want to encourage them to go for container gardening because in a matter of 30 days you will have food,201d he said.

Since then, Rom2019s UCG concept became known not only in the country but also by experts all around the world granting him more opportunities to share his advocacy.

201cI am a promoter of democratized agriculture through Urban Container Gardening technologies using the natural farming system, empowering households in reaching food security through participating in food production and ecological sanitation,201d he said.

Alternatives to rice   , Alternatives to rice   Rhealyn C.
Pojas, WHAT was often overlooked was actually the solution that is seen to cure the existing problem in our rice supply.
 
Who would have thought that a grass that grows uncultivated and harvested as material for necklaces and bracelets are actually staple crops that are now being considered by authorities as a promising cereal that is seen as an alternative to rice and corn? 
And who would have thought too that a mere fruit which is seldom heard by the Filipino masses is actually being considered by many countries as a solution to solve hunger? Rice supply deficit Being in a tropical country such as the Philippines, rice farmers will have to get through all the cost of damages brought about by inevitable typhoons or drought that often devastate the rice fields tilled by our farmers.
 
In fact, records from the Department of Agriculture Field Operations Division in Davao Region shows that our rice production in Davao suffered to 6,427.08 metric tons of damages caused by El Ni\xf1o and a total of 19,253 metric tons loss in production which is equivalent to a total value of P107,904,557.15.
  
This was the outcome of the reported El Ni\xf1o that started January until December 11 last year, according to DA Davao Agriculturist 2 Joedell Leliza who bared the data in an interview with Sun.Star Davao.
 
201cThere is a deficit in rice production because of El Ni\xf1o,201d Leliza said when asked what the main challenges are in rice production.

Given the 4,468,563 total number of population in Davao region according to the data from the Philippine Statistics Authority as of May 1, 2010 based on the 2010 Census of Population and Housing, to feed all the Filipinos remain a challenge with the current scenario that the country is in.

Adlay, the most promising cereal as alternative for rice In an effort to revive the foods used by our ancestors, the Department of Agriculture had conducted series of research and study that leads to the discovery of food items that can be used as alternative for rice.
One of the remarkable things that they had come up with was the discovery of Adlay, which, like the rice we are eating today, is a member of the family of grass along with wheat and corn.
  
According to Science Research Specialist 2 Merly Salaver of the DA-RFO Davao Research Division, Adlay was used by some Indigenous groups in Davao City as ornaments because it looked like beads but what they did not know was that in other parts of the country, some IPs used it as their alternative for rice.

DA Secretary Proceso Alcala directed the entire department to make a program about Adlay after he was intrigued that some IPs in Zamboanga Del Sur used the staple crop instead of rice and corn in one of his visits there, Salaver narrated.
Not all of its variety is edible though since others are hard-shelled which were used in ornamentations like necklace while the ones that can be eaten are soft-shelled.
Five varieties were used by the DA identified as Kiboa, Ginampay,Gulian, Dwarf and Tapol in the experiment and among these, the Kiboa variety performs better in terms of yield in both dry and wet season, according to Salaver.

201cIt is delicious and soft to eat unlike with corn rice which would end up hard after being cooked,201d Salaver said in the vernacular.

The good thing about this crop is that it is cheaper compared to rice and corn because it is only sold for P30 per kilo and it also takes longer time before it spoil after it is cooked compared to the other crops.
It is also a medicinal plant which has higher nutritive value compared to corn and rice, according to the result of the laboratory analysis done by the Crop Science Cluster-Institute of Plant breeding in the University of Philippines-Los Ba\xf1os, Food and Nutrition Research Institute chemical analysis and the FatSecret All Things Food and Diet.
 
Adlay was what our ancestors originally consumed for food but it is now being ignored by the people and this is why DA is trying to revive it.
Another advantage it has for the farmers is that by one plantation, they could make two harvests before they would clear the field again unlike with rice and corn where after the harvest, farmers will have to clear out the field and replant to have another harvest, Salaver explained.
It can also be made into several other products such as pop adlay, polvoron, and cookies among others.
Breadfruit, the superfood to counter hunger A fruit that is also a bread.
 
Breadfruit, according to an inventor who is the president of Davao Inventors Association, Inc.
 Virgilio Sangutan who had been studying the fruit for five years, is being used by around 90 countries all over the world to counter hunger.
It belongs to the family of jackfruits but tastes like camote and smells like bread when cooked.
What is fascinating about this fruit, according to Sangutan, is that it is the best type of fruit to grow in a tropical country where the problem of hunger is predominant.

Aside from it is resistant to drought because its roots penetrate deeply in the ground it is also not easily affected by flood because it is a big tree.
Pests also do not attack breadfruit because it has an enzyme that is resistant to it and it can bear good fruits even without using fertilizers.
It can bear fruits up until 50 years.

Sangutan explained that each breadfruit is equivalent to around 3 kilograms which can support five members of family in one meal.
 
It has higher content of protein compare to soya beans, high amino acids, higher potassium compared to banana, high fiber, and is rich in vitamins, according to Sangutan.

A hectare of breadfruit can produce up to 12 to 18 tons of fruits which, according to Sangutan is higher compare to palay production.

201cIf every barangay will devote at least 25 hectares of breadfruit plantation then it can solve every barangay2019s hunger,201d Sangutan said.

It can also be made into other food products such as bread, ice cream, and ice candy among others.
Breadfruit is also among those being studied by DA including No Adaptors   
Despite these findings and discovery about Adlay and Breadfruit, the challenge in providing food for the Filipinos remain since there are no adaptors to the idea and people lack the knowledge about these crops.

Salaver and Sangutan both expressed in separate interviews with Sun.Star Davao that there are still few adaptors and few people who are into the farming and production of the two fruits.
As for the Adlay, Salaver said that DA is giving seeds to farmers who will plant it and that there are only few adaptors to this while Sangutan also expressed that there are only few who focus on breadfruit the production.
 
Both Salaver and Sangutan expressed hope that the two fruits can help the country in countering the problem of rice supply and hunger.

An advocacy in a coffee shop   , An advocacy in a coffee shop   Karlo Paolo R.
Pates, IT IS not difficult for a business venture to immediately capture the hearts and attention of many especially if they are advocating for a special cause, and that cause is promoting the welfare and culture of the Indigenous Peoples  here in the country.
 
This was proven true by the advocacy campaign initiated by the Advocafe, a non-profit social enterprise that supports the cause and efforts of the IPs for a sustainable living.
 
Advocafe, taken from the root word 201cadvo201d which means advocacy, while cafe is an establishment which primarily serves hot coffee or other coffee related beverages, is owned by a non-government organization  Ilawan Center for Volunteerism and Leadership.
 
Contrary to the perceptions of many, Advocafe is definitely not just your ordinary coffee shop which you can easily find around the Metro as majority of the products being sold at the store are all natural and organic tea and coffee bean products were results of the hardwork and efforts of the lumads, IPs, and the Igorots from the respective communities all over the Philippines.
 
This was how Benjamin Abadiano, president and founder of Pamulaan Center for Indigenous People  Education and proprietor of the Advocafe formulated the idea of promoting and at the same time helping the cause of the IPs in the country.
 
"Nabuo ang aming layunin na magbigay ng opportunities to the katutubos at ng lumads na maimprove ang kanilang livelihood at maipromote din ang kanilang culture," Abadiano told Sun.Star Davao in a phone interview recently.
 
Before coming up with the Advocafe, Abadiano admitted they initially thought of establishing a marketing center where the products of the IPs are supposed to be displayed.
 
The plans, however, got scrapped after considering the idea of combining the coffee shop and marketing center them of venture in order to cater a wider scope of market.
   
That gave birth to the Advocafe business which initially opened its all of its first three branches in Luzon, particularly in Malate and Mendiola, which are in Manila; and another branch in Baguio City in the early 2000s.
 
Upon recognizing the steady growth of its first three branches, the Advocafe expanded its operations by opening two more branches but this time in Mindanao in 2010.

The fourth branch of Advocafe was opened inside the University of Southeastern Philippines -Mintal campus, located particularly at the Pamulaan Center for Indigenous Peoples Education while the fifth branch was also opened along the Quimpo Boulevard, both in Davao City.
 
201cAdvocafe is a social enterprise wherein our objection is to provide an avenue for the IPs to have a livelihood,201d Abadiano said.
  
Among the products offered at the Advocafe include chocolate cacao, turmeric granules, salabat tea, calamnsi juice, gumamela concentration, banana chips, carrot cakes, other organic pastries, and herbal tea.

These products came from the areas where there are communities of katutubos and lumads particularly in Zamboanga del Sur, Bukidnon, Cotabato, Compostela Valley, Datu Salumay, and Mountain Province.
 
All of these are products of years of research and experimentation just to ensure its quality and health benefits which can be bought at affordable prices compared to the mainstream coffee shops out there.
 Aside from the available beverages and pastries, there are also handicrafts including beadworks, papers, textiles, displayed at the caf\xe9 which the creative and artistic side of the IPs.
 
Abadiano said they have partnered with the Pamulaan Center for Indigenous People2019s  Education with the objective to create cultural appropriate pathways of training and formation for the IPs.
 
The partnership do not only focus to the IPs but also to the community leaders and development workers with their goal to provide graduates equipped with knowledge and abilities towards a sustainable development of the IP communities all over the country.
 
Even the people in-charge of running the operations of Advocafe are all fourth year IP students of the PCIPE.
 
The stint of the IP youth and students at the Advocafe also serves as their on the job training  and equivalent of a thesis output.

Abadiano, meanwhile, thanked the Peace and Equity Foundation for their support to their charity works even by just providing them a chunk of space along the Quimpo Boulevard for their branch.
 
Advocafe is just paying P1 per month of rental fee to the Peace and Equity Foundation.
 
In exchange, Abadiano stressed that 100% of Advocafe2019s net income are always donated to the IP communities.
 
201cAll the income we have from our operations are donated back to the IP communities in the form of basic services,201d Abadiano said who was the first Filipino to receive the Ramon Magsaysay Award for Emergent Leadership in 2004 for his commitment in doing charitable works for the IPs.
 
Among the basic services rendered to the IP communities include water, education, health, agriculture, and among others.
 
Other initiatives the group is also supporting the IPs in education for children and youth, Climate change adaptation, livelihood, and partnership and capability building.
 
201cTrainings on sustainable livelihood are also organized for the lumads, community leaders as well for them to be encouraged to start their own businesses,201d he added.
 
As of now, the Pamulaan Center for IP Education has more or less hundred scholars enrolled in different bachelors2019 degree.
      
Davao City to adapt Israeli greenhouse technology   , Davao City to adapt Israeli greenhouse technology   Ace June Rell S.
Perez, IN AGRICULTURE, input is planting, output is the produce, and the latter always is affected by the former.
 
Envisioning a bounty and abundant agricultural production, the city government is up for adapting a new technology developed by Israel dubbed as Israeli Greenhouse Technology that will further weigh our position as the 201cfood basket in the South201d.

Landing in the news last August 2015, the Israel Chamber of Commerce of the Philippines  and the City Government of Davao entered into an agreement for the utilization of the new technology presented by GurLavi, an Israel-based agriculture company.
201cThis developed innovative system like the Israeli agricultural greenhouse is designed for maximizing agricultural production with minimal expenses,201d Eyal Ben Ari, ICCP president and GurLavi chair said adding that they are willing to contribute to the Philippine agriculture progress through the introduction of a greenhouse technology.

Manny Pi\xf1ol, former North Cotabato governor and representative of Davao City Mayor, said that in a chamber meeting he presented to Israelis the great ironies of the Philippines.
 
201cWe are blessed with fertile soil, blessed with favorable climate for agriculture, blessed with water, and yet importing products like onions and garlic,201d Pinol said.

Ari said that as the city government is determined to adapt the technology, it is planned to be constructed in Mintal or Calinan, this city and will initially be planted with cucumber.
He also said that the facility is a 272 square meter  in area.
The facility costs $70 per sqm.

201cThe site is still up for confirmation.
Once realized, it will be the first in Mindanao.
At present it is already applied in San Pablo City and Tagaytay,201d Ari said.

The Israel Greenhouse Technology Greenhouse is a structure where plants, fruits, vegetables, flowers are grown attracting heat as the sun2019s electro-magnetic radiation warms the plants, soil and other component within the greenhouse.

The advanced greenhouse construction developed by Israel includes curtains, skylights, and shade netting, which moves automatically in reaction to sunlight.

It has a salient features including: a big internal space with good air circulation and ventilation, able to withstands winds up to 150 kilometer per hour, indoor drip irrigation system, aluminet shade installed outside and inside greenhouse, optinet providing protection against pests and diseases, and regulates growth of seedlings GurLavi agronomist Beatriz Cortes in a separate interview said that the new technology and facility has an innovative system on ventilation, circulation, light, humidity and temperature which are essential in climate control for better production.
The greenhouse structure has three different types, these are single , twin  and triple arch .

All types are seent to provide optimal growing conditions for plants.
In Boosting Production The gross production of a greenhouse in Israel is six times more than the gross production of an open field in the Philippines.

In a comparative analysis conducted by GurLavi, data showed that only 4,000 kilograms per year can be produced by the Philippine traditional agriculture in every 1,000 hectares .
While with the Israeli Greenhouse technology intervention it will reach up to 25,000 kilograms with the same land area of 1,000 has.

For decades, farmers are struggling with various internal and external factors making agricultural growth difficult 2013 weather, humidity, droughts, natural disasters, disease and various lesions that might harm crops.

201cAgricultural production is much destroyed due to 201cnon-development,201d decay, disease and other reasons.
This initiative is to allow farmers to increase their production crops, economic gains, and to reduce current expenditures of agricultural growth in order to develop optimum results,201d Ari said.
A box of hope, an infinite of kindness, A box of hope, an infinite of kindness
Contributed photo
IN THE Philippines, the city of Marikina alone produces one hundred and fifty million pairs of shoes every year.
That2019s one hundred and fifty million shoeboxes hoarded or turned to waste.
But what once was discarded has now been transformed into an instrument of hope.
For the past seven years, volunteers from integrated marketing agency TeamAsia, Information Technology and Business Process Association of the Philippines , as well as other industry partners came together to fill thousands of shoeboxes with school supplies for My Dream in a Shoebox Christmas campaign.
Each box is lovingly packed with two notebooks, one pen and pad paper, a box of crayons, an eraser, a ruler, and one bottle of glue.
It may not seem much, but for the parents of these children struggling to get by, supporting their child2019s future goes a long way.
The 2013 Functional, Literacy, Education, and Mass Media Survey  reported that 19.2 percent of the four million underprivileged children are unable to receive education due to poverty.
This translates to one in every 10 Filipino youth being out of school.
My Dream in a Shoebox desires to give these children universal access to education.
It is because of the aspiration to be part of the solution that organizers of My Dream in a Shoebox spend months meticulously planning a seamless initiative.
And after every successful campaign, the team sits down to evaluate what else can be done to make bigger dreams come true.
My Dream in a Shoebox Year 7 rallied together 57 organizations who as one industry gave over 45,000 shoeboxes to help bigger dreams come true.
201cAt the end of the day, it2019s not just about the number of shoeboxes or donations,201d says Bea Lim, Managing Director of TeamAsia.
201cIt2019s about the number of people who were inspired by it.201d she adds.
Over 45,000 shoebox donations meant thousands of emails sent to collaborate with benefactors.
It meant hundreds of phone calls spent coordinating with logistic suppliers and hundreds of volunteers painstakingly wrapping each box to make it more special.
Collecting shoebox donations to benefit children across the nation is just the first step of My Dream in a Shoebox.
The journey continued as organizers, donors, and volunteers hosted several gift-giving days.
Last December, children from Payatas Orione Foundation, Ascension of Our Lord Parish, SOS Children2019s Village Foundation, and Pedro Calungsod Parish enjoyed a day of fun and laughter with volunteers and organizers of My Dream in a Shoebox.
TeamAsia President Monette Hamlin also shared with these children the warmth of Christmas cheer through storytelling activities.
The joint effort of IBPAP and TeamAsia together with its partners National Book Store and Jones Lang LaSalle, along with industry partners have made My Dream in a Shoebox Year 7 a remarkable success.
IBPAP President Jomari Mercado says, 201cSeeing a smile light up on a child2019s face during the gift-giving celebrations make the countless of hours invested to put together My Dream in a Shoebox all worth it.201d
What are you going to do with a shoebox the next time you purchase a pair of shoes? Store it? Throw it? Or change someone2019s life with My Dream in a Shoebox?
Connect with Katrina Pimentel through +63 917 5079379 or email kepimentel@teamasia.com.
Be part of making #BiggerDreamsComeTrue.

Cacao is back; Davao Region rides the resurgence , Cacao is back; Davao Region rides the resurgence Ruji Peter S.
Abat, THE cacao industry in Davao Region has come a long way.
Back when cacao farmers were demoralized due to policy reforms, stumbling market prices, and economic crisis, the industry is now revitalized and it has been blossoming ever since.
The country as a whole was producing around 35,000 metric tons during the late 70's up to the mid 80's.
But due to the implementation of the Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Program , many big time cacao farmers were forced to relinquish portions of their farms to the farmers.

It then started a snowball which saw farms turning unproductive due to the mishandling of unskilled farmers.
Farmers back then were also forced to leave their cacaos since market prices were plummeting.
And adding to these problems, the demand for cacao was essentially low hence, farmers before were basically fighting a losing battle.
Cacao Industry Development Association of Mindanao Inc.
 executive director Valente Turtur described the early 90s as the dark age of the cacao industry in Davao Region since not only were the cacao farms left for dead, they were even cut down.
"The farmers just chose to leave the cacao industry because they can't expect any activity since the market prices were low and the demand has also low because of the economic crisis.
Basically, they just had to forget cacao," Turtur told Sun.Star Davao.
Revival of the Industry
Turtur said the country was already trying to put itself back in the global cacao industry picture in 2004 after it got help from the United States Agency for International Development  through its Success Alliance program.
Projects, however, were implemented in Luzon.
In 2007, Davao Region became part of the program but it was apparent that the program didn't sit well for the cacao industry in the region since its effects weren't felt that much and there was no take off in the industry.
Puentespina Farms and Chokolate de San Isidro, however, were already establishing their respective niche in the market being the only recognized cacao traders in the region.
Puentespina Farms made a partnership with Mars, Inc.
which led to the creation of the Mars Cocoa Development Center, a training center for cacao farmers.
Chokolate de San Isidro, meanwhile, was already mass producing chocolate tablets or tablea.
But in 2009, the US Department of Agriculture introduced the coconut, cocoa, palay  program and Davao Region became part of it.
The prices of cacao per kilo then went up to P80 hence, more and more farmers have grown their interest back in cacao.
The following year then became the advent of the revival of the cacao industry when Agricultural Cooperative Development International/Volunteers in Overseas Cooperative Assistance  conducted a cacao forum.
It was in that forum where farmers sparked an interest anew in cultivating cacao after Mars Inc.
declared that the demand has grown.
With a reinvigorated interest cacao, various stakeholders in the private sector gathered up and held a series of meetings to discuss how they could revive the industry.

By 2011, Cidami was established and they became the forerunners when it comes to empowering cacao farmers and traders in the region.
In the following year, the cacao industry earned the support of the government as the Department of Agriculture  provided funds and seedlings, the Department of Trade and Industry  helped out in organizing forums while the Department of Environment and Natural Resources  included cacao in the National Greening Program.
The production of cacao in Davao Region from 2011 to the current year has then grown significantly as Turtur said, "Our production has more than doubled in the span of five years.
In 2011, we were producing around 5,000 metric tons.
But in 2015 we produced more than 12,000 metric tons."
Best Practices
The boom of the cacao industry in the span of five years can be attributed to the best practices that the cacao farmers have undergone.
In the farming aspect, Turtur said that the bread and butter in maintaining the quality of the cacao fruits has always been pruning and putting sleeves on the cacao fruits or pods as what the farmers call them.
This method, Turtur said, is called pod-sleeving.
Turtur said pruning refers to the trimming of unnecessary branches on the cacao trees.
This technique is effective for pest control, disease prevention and nutrient absorption on the cacao plants.
With the use of pruning, cacao farmers can control pests like pod burrowers since these pests thrive on gloomy environments.

Turtur also said that cutting off the unnecessary branches allows more sunlight to bring heat to the trees which will in turn thwart the development of fungal infections such us pod rot.
He added if you leave these unnecessary branches the tendency is these branches will absorb the nutrients instead of those productive branches.
Yet there are simply instances when diseases and infestations can't be averted.
This is when pod-sleeving comes in handy since sealing the pods with plastic or paper can prevent pod burrowers and pod rot from destroying fruit.
A well-timed schedule for the application of fungicides and pesticides is also a must since trees may become more vulnerable to diseases if these chemicals are abused.
Turtur also suggested that farmers should utilize service alleys for better farm mobility and trash alleys from where decomposable wastes could be thrown away until it becomes a fertilizer.
He also said that while organic fertilizers are good, applying synthetic fertilizers can still play a huge part in providing nutrients to the plant.
As for the business aspect, Turtur said farmers should also think like entrepreneurs or what he refers to as "agropreneurs." In a bid to help farmers become more well-versed in the business aspect of cacao farming, Turtur urged them to attend investment forums which they organize in partnership with DA and DTI.
Suggested Reforms
Sharing his concern over how the support from the government has been delivered, Turtur said that DA should be more holistic in its approach citing that in some instances, there are programs where the agency merely gives free cacao seedlings to farmers, who are mostly lacking in management skills.
He said that, that if DA can't provide the technical skills and management training, at least they could coordinate with Cidamiso that they would be the one conducting the training.
Furthermore, the El Nino phenomenon has significantly affected the production of cacao for the past months.
Hence, he urged DA to pour in more funds for the construction of water irrigation systems instead of giving out free seedlings.
Lastly, an organized monitoring system on the progress of farms as well as the market prices should be established so that farmers will have some sort of quota to target.
Turtur said that during the first cacao forum in the region back in 2010, Mars, Inc.
declared the world will have a one-million metric ton deficit by 2020 and the Philippines should have produced around 100,000 metric tons by then.
Yet in the pace that the cacao industry in Davao Region has been currently moving, the cacao players here are optimistic that they can cope up with the demand.
And it's not just about meeting the demand.
Most importantly, the cacao industry aims to alleviate poverty among the farmers while improving the economic status of the region.
 
The dreaded disease is back   , The dreaded disease is back   Christine Joice C.
Cudis, PANAMA disease or fusarium wilt, the "most dreaded" disease in the banana industry, which wiped out the whole Gros Michel cultivar in the 1960,s is spreading again, infesting the major source of livelihood of most people from the Davao region.

Banana growers and exporters are already losing thousand bananas in their plantations and millions in their pockets as they remain unaware of the solution to stop the further damage it causes.
 Worst, workers are not keen on following basic procedures to stem the spread.
 
Dr.
Harry Rajamannan of the Agro-K Philippines, who has spent 45 years in Banana research and is considered as among the great minds in discovering the answers to problems in the field of agriculture shares his knowledge on the matter.
 
"The laborers fail to prevent the spread of this disease.
They walk through the hot spot areas to collect fruits, walking through the infected area to the clean soil.
It is the main distributor of this disease," he explained.
 
He added that he and his group has seen the laborers taking the stems of the banana fruits from the packing plant and leave it in clean areas to rot, not realizing that the stems from harvested in disease areas are also taking this fungus to infect non-infected plants.
 
The key to avert the further spreading of the disease is, according to him, teaching the laborers on proper bio-security protocols.
 
He added that in other countries  where the presence of the fungus is also alarming, strict practice of security is imposed.
No one can pass through their plantation especially if one has been to a land with reported cases of Fusarium wilt.
 
For now, Agro-K Philippines is developing a vaccine to be injected with the surrounding plant from the infected ones.
It should prevent the banana from acquiring the disease.
They are now providing these vaccines as samples to farmers who were devastated by the effects of the disease.
 
In another interview with the Department of Agriculture  Davao Plant Pathologist Arlene Seguiro, she said that they offer the farmers whose plantations were infected with the disease several options to aid in their situation.
 
Among these was cordoning the portion of the banana plantation infested with the wilt, then, precede on stand-burning the infected ones to ashes where they pay the farmers P500 per mat as incentive fee.
 
201cWe do this, so we can kill the fungus while it is still on its underdeveloped stage,201d she explained.
 
The worst that this disease can lead to is the production of chlamydosphores or resting spores.
It is the stage of the fungus where it has developed full resistance from any counter poison and will survive in the soil for decades.
  
As assistance to the farmers, DA Davao is also providing Trichodermaharzianum, a kind of fungus which is also used as a fungicide; it has an antagonistic capability against the disease.
It will be injected to the follower of the infected plant to prevent further development of the fungus.
 
Giant Cavendish tissue-cultured  banana is also slowly being introduced in the market as it is deemed as the new resistant variety to Panama disease Race 4.
With deformed fingers, and less hands, it is inferior to Cavendish.
Just like how Cavendish was inferior to Gros Michel before.
 
Although pesticide can protect bananas from infection, the chemicals will contaminate the water and soil in the long run.
  
Genetic research may re-engineer the Cavendish to resist this particular disease but again, we would have to come up with a new genetic solution for every future disease which is just another short-term solution.
 
Variety in the ecosystem is needed.
If we form our variety of bananas, their unique growing patterns, shapes, and imperfections emerge naturally.
This variation exists to protect the specie.

If this is pushed, we would not have to worry much if one genetic specimen catches the disease because by then we are not that reliant on one species alone.
Facebook celebrating its users' friendships for its birthday, Facebook celebrating its users' friendships for its birthday
In this Dec.
13, 2011 file photo, a sign with Facebook's "Like" logo is posted at Facebook headquarters near the office for the company's User Operations Safety Team in Menlo Park, California.
 
SAN FRANCISCO -- Facebook is giving friendship collages to its 1.6 billion users in celebration of the social network's 12th birthday.
The collages will be packaged in video presentations of photos of friends and family that have been previously been posted on Facebook.
The photos are picked out by automated technology, although each Facebook user will be able to delete some and select other pictures instead.
The videos won't be seen by anyone else unless a user decides to share the presentation.
Most Facebook users should start seeing the videos at the top of their Facebook feeds by noon Thursday, which the Menlo Park, California, company is hailing as "Friends Day."
It coincides with the 12th anniversary of Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg starting the social network in his Harvard University dorm room.

A trip down memory lane   , A trip down memory lane   Christine Joice C.
Cudis, FOR every 90's kids out there, surely, Ramon Magsaysay Park was their own version of Disneyland when they were small.
  
Although new leisure parks mushroomed in the city, it still stood to whatever it was before, an avenue for everyone to have a moment for their own.
 
Groomed with old and rustic amenities, the park still functions as they did before.
The bicycle and skating rink, still hears the sound of laughter from the children and the child-at-hearts.
 
The rows of trees still witness people: love, fight, and love again and the beach still has kids swimming on it.
 
As much as how joyful it is to walk through the place one has spent so much happiness before, it might be better if the park will go through some repairs as some of the facilities there grew older as well.
 
Perhaps, it would make more tourists come visit it again  and spend some time there if the beach no longer emits a foul odor or if trash will not be seen floating on the surface.

Pride in one2019s job   , Pride in one2019s job   Jeepy P.
Compio, A TYPICAL day for a public school teacher means leaving home early in the morning to await the flag ceremony with the students, and then return homlong after the sun has set.
 
That is just one of the challenges that teacher Kenneth C.
Ceballos is exposed to for the more than a decade of being a secondary public school teacher.
 
But he regards this as a blessing in disguise, saying what others sees as a challenge is a delight to his eyes.
 
"At the end of the day, I always ask myself: Is this the fruit of my labor? Then, all of a sudden, all I get from that question is a certain yes and I know right then that if hard work and faith in God is present, miracle is not a myth," he shares.

He draws inspiration from his students, especially in knowing that what he teaches help them learn and grow into responsible and proactive individuals.
 
It wasn2019t an easy path toward his dream of becoming a teacher.
 
"During my high school days, I used to sell Yema.
Life is a little difficult but we have to push hard and make a decision that will help us build a bridge to achieve our dreams," he said.
Being the eldest among his siblings, they were raised by her mother2019s earnings as canteen-in-charge in school and his father2019s wage as a welder.
  
He spent his elementary years at Matina Central Elementary School and finished his secondary education at the Davao City National High School.
 
Ceballos eventually took a degree in Bachelor of Secondary Education  with a major in Physics-Chemistry at the San Pedro College of Davao and graduated in 2007.
 
He joined the Sirawan National High School  Toril District in Davao City as faculty member and teaches General Science, Physics, Values Education, and Technology and Livelihood Education .

201cAfter graduation, I immediately took a teaching profession in a private school in Bangkal and was lucky enough to eventually get hired by the Department of Education by God2019s grace and was assigned at Sirawan,201d Ceballos said.

Aside from his teaching load, he is also the cook in the school2019s canteen and is thus called by many as 2018Sir Chef2019.

He does not mind, as he sees this as just one of the roles he has to take to earn a decent living.
Aside from teaching high school students, he also works as an instructor at the Davao Merchant Marine Academy  and teaches Alternative Learning System , the Informal Education  of the Deped that gives National Certificate  II in different fields to those who complete the course.
 
Just recently, Ceballos became one of the trainers for the Regional Training on Technology and Livelihood Education  Grade 9 Teachers in Deped 11.

Twitter CEO Jack Dorsey says timeline will stay in real time , Twitter CEO Jack Dorsey says timeline will stay in real time 
FILE - This Friday, Oct.
18, 2013, file photo, shows a Twitter app on an iPhone screen, in New York.
Twitter says that four executives are leaving the company.
Twitter CEO Jack Dorsey posted Monday, Jan.
25, 2016, that Alex Roetter, Skip Schipper, Katie Stanton and Kevin Weil are exiting the company.
Roetter served as senior vice president of engineering, Schipper was vice president of human resources, Stanton was vice president of social media and Weil was senior vice president of product.

NEW YORK 2014 Twitter CEO Jack Dorsey said Saturday the social media website's stream of tweets will stay live and in real time, disputing a media report that a change was in the works.
News and entertainment site BuzzFeed reported on Friday that Twitter was going to introduce a timeline based on an algorithm rather than a real-time stream.
The report upset some users, who created the hashtag RIPTwitter to debate the change.
But Dorsey took to Twitter on Saturday to dispute the report.
"Twitter is live," he tweeted.
"Twitter is real-time."
BuzzFeed updated its report with Dorsey's response.
Twitter is facing slowing user growth and has been trying to make its service more appealing with a feature called Moments, which compiles photos, videos and messages about big news events.
It's also considering other changes.
The San Francisco-based social media site reports quarterly earnings on Wednesday.

Masbad: Open season for story telling, Masbad: Open season for story tellingRoark L.
Masbad, Wacky Tech, TOWARD the end of the previous month, an article from Artsy describing photojournalists moving toward ditching their dSLR cameras and shooting more with their smartphones.
I2019m not really surprised with this considering that mobile photography has been on the rise ever since the birth of smartphones and mobile connectivity.
That and coupled with the fact that media consumption by the audience is ravenous, to say the least.

I2019ve noticed lately that today2019s news and media consumers have very short attention spans and they couldn2019t care less about reading a very well-written article.
In fact, one can see this phenomenon happening on your very own Facebook timeline.
I have a hunch that more often than not, you2019ll notice a lot of people reacting with comments and tirades right away about some article that was posted with only the title to go with.
It2019s almost like a shoot-now-ask-questions-later attitude.
I2019ve seen it happen on my timeline.

So, going back.
Photojournos posting more on their Instagram accounts.
This basically means, they shoot more with their mobile devices.
Okay, fine, they2019ve become quicker in posting almost-real-time photos on their social media feeds.
Personally, I actually like that better.
I get an almost-real-time look at what2019s happening at pretty much any event happening around the world.
All you gotta do is follow the right photojournos and there you are.

In relation to this, hashtags come to mind as well.
It2019s everywhere.
In fact, everyone pretty much comes up with hashtags for whatever they post online.
I even have my own hashtag for whenever I am travelling or for whenever I cooked - #byahengwacky and #lutongwacky, respectively.
Hashtags make it easier to track down photos of events relevant to you.
In some ways, everyone has become a sort of photojournalist because of the ubiquity of smartphones and mobile internet.
We journalize our own personal exploits and publish it on a platform somewhere - Facebook, Instagram, Blogspot, Wordpress, Twitter.
New media as they say.
I rightly agree with it as well.

It2019s a double-edged sword though.
It can cut both ways.
One way is what I was just referring to - the almost-real-time publishing of photographic records of what2019s happening in whatever part of the world.
The other way is the almost rampant publishing of photos that may actually be not related to a particular event; just something thrown in to the mix.

However it may cut though, my take here is that the photojournalists of today have a better platform to share their stories.
Whether you2019re an old-timer or a new-comer, the digital platform is there for you to take advantage of so you can tell your stories however you see fit.

It2019s open season for story telling through photographs.

Glorious, ain2019t it?
The 3D Torogan goes mainstream  , The 3D Torogan goes mainstream  
DAVAO.
Architect Gloryrose Dy-Metilla assembles a prototype of the Balay-Balay Ta Torogan Royal House 3D puzzle, which are now available on a limited release, during last Tuesday2019s Arttalk, a monthly arts and culture press conference.

Stella A.
Estremera, THE Balay-Balay 3D architecture puzzle of a Torogan, the Maranao2019s royal house, produced by SwitoDesigns Studio of young architects Gloryrose Dy-Metilla and Glorypearl Dy last year, is now being offered for pre-ordering until February 14.

The Torogan is the ancestral house of Maranao royalty most identifiable by its panolong or beam-ends with intricately carved floral and naga or the fern-like sacred snakesokir designs.
The Torogan Balay-Balay is handmade by artisans and artists in Mintal, Davao City, and is made up of pieces and measures 9.5201d x 11.5201d.

It is available until February 14 on a limited first release of just 50 pieces for P3,500 .
It is a 1:100 scale model of a torogan based on the published studies of the late Maranao scholar Dr.
Abdullah T.
Madale, and the architecture thesis of Henna S.
Dazo, who graduated from BS Architecture at the University of the Philippines-Mindanao.

Showing the interlocked foundation of the torogan during last week2019s Arttalk, Dy-Metilla said that it is in fact built to withstand forces of nature.

The interlocked wood and elevated piles rest on top of round boulders, which is actually an ancient version of what is now known as seismic isolation structure that is used to make tall buildings earthquake-resilient.
.

Every post of a torogan has five to six of these boulders of different sizes and the biggest torogan is known to have 56 posts.
201cEven before the Spaniards came, our building already had rollers parakung may earthquake, it will just roll,201d Dy-Metilla explained, 201cmuch like modern high-rise buildings now.201d 
In Madale2019s book, 201cThe Maranaw Torogan201d, he quoted Dr.
Jesus Peralta of the National Museum in explaining about the floating foundation of the royal house.
"he floating supports are intentionally done also because the Lanao Region land is tectonically unstable, that often, it is visited by earthquakes.
The boulders serve as protection when earthquakes strike.
The entire torogan will just roll and sway and left undamaged after the tremors," the book read.

Aside from making the structure earthquake-resilient, the floating foundation also makes it withstand very strong winds.
It is also elevated from the ground  by as high as 2.21 meters, equivalent to one standard floor height, allowing it to withstand flood and wood decay.

The panolongs, which is the distinct mark of a torogan, symbolize power, rank, and leadership.
 
"Except for the front, side, and back posts, all the other posts supporting a torogan extend only up to the floor jousts.
Another set of posts are used on the first floor.
Even the roof has its own set of posts which are usually smaller, slimmer, and intricately carved.
The rampatan or center rood beam is called a tinai a walai, intestive of the house.
It is intricately carved with the front end carved into a prow and the end carved into the shape of twin fish fins,201d Madale2019s book reads.

The ground floor is used as storage or display area, and also as living quarters of servants or the orobarang.
It is also where the brass cannons or lantakas are kept.

In some cases, this is also used as living quarters of families who cannot be accommodated in the main frloot, but this has a stigma or being of low status and the community looked down on families who lived under the house.
They even have a word for those living under the torogan: mananagawalay.
The main floor accommodates the whole clan of the Sultan.
During Muslim holidays, the torogan is the venue for the community feast.

As Madale wrote, in Maranaw society, all cultural activities in the community emanate from the torogan where the sultan holds court.
Those interested to get one of the 50 first release Torogan 3D puzzles can send their orders through here 
The puzzles will start being shipped out by last week of February.
 
The Balay-balay Torogan 3D architecture puzzle, first produced with a grant from the National Commission for Culture and the Arts  last year, was introduced last year in a series of exhibits that included a playtime with children and an okir workshop by visual artist and scholar Al Nezzar Ali in Abreeza Mall and a tour covering Manila, Cagayan de Oro, and Marawi.

It was produced with the aim of helping children aged 6-12 appreciate traditional architecture and become well-versed with the Mindanao designs beyond just the ubiquitous bahaykubo.

What sets aside Balay-Balay Torogan puzzle from other 3D puzzles available in toyshops and department stores is that it comes with a literature on what the pieces and the design is all about.

With the first release about to be done, Dy-Metilla said they are now working on the prototype of the Obo Manobo house and also the Balangay of Butuan City.
A beauty so profound, A beauty so profound
INSPIRED BEAUTY.
For Miss Cebu 2016 Raine Baljak, the whole pageant was a wonderful, meaningful journey, an opportunity for her to evolve further into a better person.

Deneb R.
Batucan, Miss Cebu 2016 Raine Baljak begins her reign brimming with love, passion and wisdom
, WE2019VE all heard about her, newly crowned Miss Cebu 2016 Gabrielle Raine Abellana-Baljak, a beautiful, passionate 19 year old with a mind so profound and a heart so generous.
To say that Raine loves life is an understatement.
The diversity of interests she nurtures 2014 literature, the arts, athletics, volunteerism 2014 is quite impressive.
But it2019s how she delves into these pursuits that lets her stand out, revealing essential qualities that makes her new role as Miss Cebu even more relevant.
Yet all these didn2019t develop overnight.
Sun.Star Weekend has the full story.
Click here to read more.
Romantic dates in Davao City top hotels, Romantic dates in Davao City top hotelsRuji Peter S.
Abat, VALENTINES's Day is just around the corner and if you're planning a date with your special someone, top hotels here in Davao City are offering packages to provide you with the romantic experience on hearts day.
Over at the Park Inn by Radisson Davao's RBG Bar and Grill, couples can either have a Valentine's Day lunch buffet for P850 or a dinner buffet at P1,100 per head.
Dining couples can expect intercontinental cuisines which include roasted lechon, flank steak as well as a Valentine's Day-themed desserts composed of the Straw-"very" Sweet Shortcakes, Tira-Miss-u Squares Chocolate Fountain of Love and the three-layered Royal Love Cake.
The Grand Regal Hotel, meanwhile, has a different twist in its Valentine's Day event dubbed #Laughter #Lover.
The event features a standup comedy performance from Daniela Aliermo aka Vice GandaKalokalike Grand Champion and Giovanni Ra\xf1ises.
Fee for the event is pegged at P700 per head inclusive of a dinner buffet.
Seda Abreeza, on the other hand, has maintained the traditional wine-and-dine date but this time they have included music performances and poetry reading in their event dubbed Misto Music and Poetry Nights which will kick off on February 12 until Valentine2019s Day on February 14.
For P1,580 per head, couples can feast on a three-course wine pairing dinner.

The appetizers are Morchella, Porcini, Fresh mushroom, Truffle Oil, Arugula, Sorbet, Mandarin Orange and Robert Mondavi Woodbridge Chardonnay.
The main course, meanwhile, includes New Zealand beef tenderloin Braised in Bordeaux Red Wine, Mashed Potato, Haricot Vert, Asparagus and Carrots, Pan-Seared Atlantic Scallops, White Wine and French Butter, Pumpkin and Green Peas Pesto Puree, Watercress, Edible Flowers Robert Mondavi Woodbridge Merlot while the desserts are Seda Abreeza Specialty Cake, Red Velvet White Chocolate Cheesecake, French macarons, Ferrero Rocher and South African Sweet Wine.
Grand Regal Hotel, for its part, will hold the Valentine's Day event dubbed a "A Toast to Love".
Couples can enjoy a five-course dinner buffet with appetizers and desserts as well as good music.
The dinner is pegged at P750.
Grand Regal Hotel is also offering a Valentine's Room Package at the Deluxe Room for P2,300 and P2,600 at the Premier Room.
The overnight is already inclusive of a breakfast buffet for two.

Valentine's Day tips  , Valentine's Day tips  Rhealyn C.
Pojas, ROSE are red, violets are blue and guess what?!
It is heart's day again and you must be in a dilemma whether what to give your special someone this fourteenth day of February!
Presents and presence
While chocolates and flowers may sound a clich\xe9, nothing still beats that classic feeling of receiving gifts the vintage way.
In this era where people tend to choose what is readily made or available in the market, an effort to find something out of the piles of instant things is a worthy gift for keeps.
You may consider scribbling some letters too, expressing your feelings in the sincerest way.
Admit it, not everyone does that anymore.
Now, does that sound romantic? 
But what is the best gift for some may not be the best gift for others so try to do a little contemplation or discerning over what your partner loves to do.
If he is a man, is he adventurous or sporty or a bookworm? 
If she is a woman, does she like movies, taking pictures, travelling, or a techie? You can have a list of questions going on in your mind and come up with the most brilliant gift you could ever give.
On top of all your gift list for this Valentine's Day is, of course, your presence.
Material things will not suffice if you will end up having not the slightest time spent for your special someone.
Common knowledge dictates that presence is more appreciated than presents.

Go places
If you happened to be an employee or a self-employed person who is busy doing your business then the 14th must be the best time to lighten up some work load and spend some quality time with your friends or lovers or whoever it is you are planning to spend your Valentine's Day with.
It could be a place to hang out and catch up with friends and lovers in a restaurant or a solemn place where you could let your thoughts wander off freely.

You might consider having a fine dinner together at your favorite restaurant in the city or prefer a more solemn place by the beach, particularly in your favorite resort somewhere in the island of Samal if you are in Davao City.
A get-away every once in a while surely will not hurt your pocket.
Love, now and everyday
All efforts would appear futile though if you lack this one thing which must be on the priority list: love.
You should not only love on February 14 because every day must be the season of love.
As the famous verse in the bible states:
Love is patient, love is kind.
It does not envy, it does not boast, it is not proud.
It does not dishonor others, it is not self-seeking, it is not easily angered, it keeps no record of wrongs.
Love does not delight in evil but rejoices with the truth.
- 1 Corinthians 13:4-7
Tips for romance and lovelife , Tips for romance and lovelife Karina V.
Canedo, HOW to increase your love luck for 2016?
International FengShui master first and only Filipina to be awarded to date as Master FengShui by the world renowned International FengShui Association, Marites Allen, gave her some love tips for successful romance and lovelife for 2016.
1) Go and explore love at your door.
"In terms sa pag-ibig, yung mga taong nag-iisip at nagdadalawang isip pa, now is the time.
Life is too short, so if you feel na may napupusuan ka na, kunyari babaeka, diba sa Pilipino ayaw nating magpahalata ng ating feelings.
I believe we are now celebrating love in the 21st century so let it go and explore," Allen said.
2) Activate the southwest sector of love and romance in your house.
"Halimbawa ikaw babae gusto mo mag karoon ng makakasama sa buhay, you can activate a certain sector of your house which is the southwest, sector for love and marriage so alagaan ninyo ang southwest," Allen said.
Allen said that placing picture of you and your crush at the southwest sector may also increase your luck in trying to get his/her attention.
"Kung meron kang crush, pwede mong ipagdikit ang inyong mukha digitally at pwede niyo po siyang i-frame at you put it on the southwest part of your house and bedroom tapos pailawan mo siya because symbolically you are trying to invite the attention of the other party para kayo magkita at para kayo magkausap," Allen said.
3) Follow the horoscope guide to your sign's lucky months and days.
"Basically people who are born in the year of the rooster are the luckiest in love in 2016, pero ang lahat ng twelve animal signs meron tayong buwan at araw na pwede kayong swertihin sa pag-ibig," Allen said.
She said these prescribed months and dates can be found in the individual horoscope books.
4) Wear accessories that symbolize love and marriage.
Allen said that to increase your luck you can also wear something with double happiness symbol and mystic knot that is actually a symbol of love and marriage.
She also reminded that FengShui contributes 33 percent to your luck, and human action and divine intervention are still the remaining contributing factors.
Dos and dont's on a first date , Dos and dont's on a first date Karlo Paolo R.
Pates, IT'S love month once again and it's that time of the year where colorful displays of red roses and oversized stuffed toys, and heart-shaped decorations are seen everywhere.

It's also that time of the year where couples are planning and deciding where to go a date for the Valentine's day.
For long-time lovers who have been together for several years, it would be easier and comfortable for them as they have grown accustomed to dating having done this several times in their relationships.
But for those who are not yet in the status of "in a relationship," the dating part usually happens during the courtship stage wherein two persons are still on the getting to know each other stage.
Dating is the time that you can actually build a strong chemistry with your soon-to-be partner or lover.
That's why for the first timers or beginners in dating, here are some tips on the do's and don't things that you should or shouldn't do during your official dates.
All of these are based on the inputs shared by some of my close friends.
Wearing comfortable dress or clothes would be a good idea to start a date.
Choosing a place for your date also depends on the type of person you are with.
If he or she is into food then you can go with a budget-friendly restaurant but if you date prefers scenic views and spots then you should bring her to a place that does not only have food but also romantic views such as sea-side or hill-side restaurants.

Don'ts:
Bad Attitude
Do not reveal any negative attitude towards your date.
Being rude towards your partner could possibly turn the soon-to-be romantic story into a fantasy.
It could also end any chance of scoring another date.

Don't talk about the past
It's a big no-no for the two of you to bring back the wrongs of past relationships as it could possibly affect the mood of your date.
The idea of you going in a date is for you and your soon to be partner to move forward and not back.
Don't be too hard on yourself
Talking about how miserable and lonely you are is a big sign turn-off during a date.
It is possible to share these feelings only to a therapist and a trusted friend and not to your date.
It could reflect how desperate you are in looking for a relationship even if you are not ready yet.
Dos
Valentine's date jitters are inevitable and in order to get rid of these, you need to phone a close friend/s or family to get some words encouragement before you meet date.
As they say it's an effective way to prepare yourself before the big date.
Be real
Try to make the conversation between the two of you pleasant and positive.
You don't need to talk about about serious stuff but you can also ask him or her about hobbies and passions.
But it still depends on the interest of the person you are dating with.

Don't try to be anything.
Just be yourself.
That's the important thing.

Be optimistic
Display positive body language in order for your date or partner to realize how entertaining and comfortable to be with.
Make sure to make eye contact and listen to your date.
But it is easier for one to do these things if you really like him or her.
It's easier to score a second date if both of you feel that spark.
But if you're really interested in a second date, then don't be shy to ask for it.

What love knows...
, What love knows...
Ivy C.
Tejano, "Love knows no limit to its endurance, no end to its trust, no fading of its hope; it can outlast anything.
It is, in fact, the one thing that still stands when all else has fallen." - 1 Corinthians 13:7-10
LOVE has no labels and no flaws.
Love exists, regardless of our opinions about what it should be.
It is an unwavering concern for the well- being of the other despite his or her imperfections.
Love knows:
No boundaries
Rossel Diva and Alberto Espejo has been a couple for more than a year now.
But most of the time, the two cannot be seen together, as Espejo had to work abroad, while Diva have to work here and take care of their child named Behati.
"Being in a long distance relationship is not simple.
But as long as both of you remains faithful to each other, you can never go wrong.
Well, constant communication is really important aside from just trusting each other," Diva said.
To have a healthy relationship, Espejo said, the couple needs to communicate to each other, learn to listen and listen with undivided attention, understand, and forgive the imperfections.
No culture
Lorna Hanginon and Genevec Palma Gil Burgos were lovers for seven years before they got married for almost a year now.
Despite having different culture, Lorna is Visayan while Genevec, who also belongs to another tribe, their love binds them.
 
"We do have a lot of differences.
He is quiet while I am too loud.
He is organized while I am the opposite.
Differences have never been an issue to us, in fact, we love our differences.
We learned from it," Lorna said.
No religion
Donna Joy Intia and Mohammad Shafiuq Bin Abdullah have been bestfriends for about four years already.
Intia met Abdullah when he went for a tour in Malaysia sometime in March 2012.
Intia said even after she returned home in August 2012, their communication was constant.
She added that even if she is a Catholic and her friend is a Muslim that does not stop them from being friends.
"To respect other people's religious beliefs is already a form of love," Intia said.
No age
Nida Corpin and Ricky Deque\xf1a have been a couple for more than 10 years.
Corpin, who is 48, is 11 years older than her partner Deque\xa4a, 37.
Corpin met Deque\xf1a through her uncle.
"We started as friends until we reached to the point that what we have is more than just friends.
He courted me for a month before I answered him, yes.
Despite the significant age gap, we are still together," Corpin said.
There are flaws and disagreements, Corpin said, but these never become reasons for them to give up, instead, these give them room to improve as individuals and as a couple.
No gender
According to them, sexual orientation is not a choice.
People may have different sexual orientations but that does not make them any different from the others.
Love is celebrated and not judged.
Che Palicte and Hezel Estorpehave been a couple for six years now, and despite all the challenges they went through, the two remains to be happy and contented with each other.
"Love is someone who can stand by your side no matter who you are and no matter what happens.
We reached this far because we have so much respect to each other and we value one another despite our differences," Palicte said.
Herve Guy Abellano echoed the same outlook about love.
Abellano and his boyfriend only named as Jhysn have been together for two months now, and they are both happily in love, he said.
"Others are entitled to their own opinion.
But as long as we are not hurting anyone, we can never go wrong.
We are two months and counting more and just like other people, we are entitled to love and be loved," Abellano said.
There is no formula in love.
Being complex in so many ways, love sure makes the world go round.
Classy, affordable stay at Alu Hotel           , Classy, affordable stay at Alu Hotel           Christine Joice C.
Cudis, WITH Davao City's thriving tourism industry, this cozy hotel at the heart of the city is attracting more tourists, both foreign and local as it offers affordable yet classy accommodation.
The Alu Hotel along Roxas Avenue, which stands for Associated Labor Unions, opened in 2009 to cater only to its members and shareholders.
But after four years, it has expanded its operation and opened the hotel to the public in 2013.
Tourists had not stopped going in and out of the building since then.
With its strategic location and amenities, the hotel rates remain friendly for travelers with limited budget.
Amid the demand of tourists, the hotel tied up with several online applications for traveling such as Expedia, Agoda, Booking.com, and Trip Advisor.
Most of their guests come from as far as Europe and other parts of Asia.
An average of 50 clients stay at the Alu Hotel every month.

Alu Hotel manager Randy Ibot said guests are served with mouthwatering dishes.
"In Le Cafe, wide array of Filipino and Italian dishes are served.
We make sure that the guests get their money's worth when they stay in our hotel," Ibot said.
Beef Salpicao and Bicol Express are the hotel's top favorites at their restaurant.
More people also flock there during paydays as they offer a promo of P199 per head for their buffet.
With their recent partnership with the local government unit's tourism project, the Visit Davao Fun Sale , guests can enjoy a 40 percent discount on peak season which falls during the summer.
With the influx of tourists continually coming in, the management eyes expansion to accommodate more guests.
4 romantic getaways , 4 romantic getaways Ace June Rell S.
Perez, HOW to make memories that last a lifetime is often the challenge for every couple.
We want to travel and travel and travel and travel.
But traveling solo is not a good idea.
Traveling with your partner is of course an experience worth remembering.
For lovers who plan to make memories in romantic destinations, here are some of the highlands to islands "outdoor dates" you might want to consider.
Jive Highland Resort
Just an hour and 45 minutes away from the city, lovers can disconnect from the hustle and bustle of the busy city and reconnect with nature.
The cool breeze, tall and green pine trees, panoramic views of mountains and sites of natural falls and caves are just some of the things why lovers should give a visit at Jive Highland Resort located in Sitio Tagumpay, Datu Salumay, Marilog District, Davao City,
Jack's Ridge
In making promises sealed with faith and commitment, couples resort to love locks.
A love lock is a padlock which lovers write their names or initials on, fasten to a public fixture like a bridge or fence and throw away its key to symbolize a strong and lasting love.
Love locks have been appearing in various locations worldwide including Baclaran Church and the most famous lovelocks sites at Pont des Arts Bridge in Paris.
In Davao City, lovers can lock their relationship and say "there is forever" in Davao Jack's Ridge, Shrine Hills, Matina.
As Jack's Ridge had witnessed too many love declaration and marriage proposal, it hopes to carry on the tradition and encourage sweethearts to seal their love at the Lover's Rail.
Love Locks at Jack's Ridge are available for sale at Taklobo Restaurant, Karlo's Coffee Shop and Kais Bar Cashier's counter.
Vista View Hilltop
If you plan to share love moments with a fine panoramic view overlooking the city and serene and relaxing feeling, have a date and dine at Vista View Hilltop Barangay Langub.
The place has a romantic ambiance, especially when you view the city lights from the top.
It is an inexpensive place to bring your special someone.
La Isla Bonita
If you are planning to seclude yourself and your partner in an island, La Isla Bonita in Talikud island is the perfect place to be.
La Isla Bonita Beach Resort is a 160- meter of white sand beach and clear turquoise waters.
La Isla Bonita is a real escapade from the mad crowded city with its picturesque and panoramic view that will surely give a calming and soothing kind of feeling to lovers.
There are more to celebrating this red date than the usual movie and picnic dates, travel with your love and make good and romantic memories that will turn forgetting an impossible thing.
She2019s only just begun, She2019s only just begun
SONGWRITER.
Young Ashley Go plays the guitar and ukulele, and writes songs about what people around her are going through.
Q&A: Pop music prodigy Ashley Go embarks on musical journey to record album of original songs
, WHAT were you doing when you were 12 years old? Probably worrying about pimples and grades and if having crushes was a natural thing for girls your age.
But for 12-year-old Ashley Go, it is how to get that right melody, that perfect rhyme so she could finish recording an entire album of original compositions before summer ends.
Ashley2019s talent in writing songs surprised everyone in the family of businessmen and entrepreneurs.
Parents Oliver and Charlotte couldn2019t remember encouraging their daughter to give music a serious thought.
They2019d rather have her in the family2019s businesses.
Read more about Ashley in Sun.Star Weekend's February 7, 2016 issue.
An OFW story , An OFW story Ivy C.
Tejano, 201cIT TAKES nerves of steel and the muscle to work abroad.201d 
This is how 63-year-old Judith Gonzales Reyes described her experience as an overseas Filipino worker .

Reyes has been a skilled worker in Kuwait, an Arab country on the Persian Gulf, for 12 years.
She decided to land a job abroad at the age 38 to provide a better future for her family.

The hardest battle of an OFW mother is knowing that you cannot take care of your own children and enjoy the company of the family for years on end.
It was on 1999 when Reyes left the Philippines for Kuwait.

She said she can still recall the emotion she had when she left her children, her husband and parents.

201cThe life of the OFW is not easy.
If only we can earn big in the Philippines to sustain the needs of our family, we would not have gone this far.
Kaya kahit gaano pa kapagod at lungkot, kakayanin mo alang-alang sa pamilya mo,201d Reyes said.

Reyes worked as a tailor.
Her work started at 10 a.m.
and ended at 10 p.m.
but there were times, the work extended at 11 p.m.
because of the employer2019s demand.

201cOkay naman kasi kumikita naman ako ng maayos.
Yung sahod namin na sa 300-riyal equivalent to P3,000 noong araw.
Nakakapadala na ako ng pera sa pamilya ko para sa pangangailangan nila,201d she said.

Never did she imagine that things would go wrong.
Her employer stopped paying their wages and she even got jailed for about five months because she could not renew her residence certificate, which is the company2019s responsibility to their workers.

201cYes, I was emotionally and financially abused.
Ni hindi ako nakapadala for my family.
When I went out from jail, our employer was even demanding 300 riyals from us claiming this as our monthly rental for our visa,201d Reyes said.
 
201cTiniis ko yun hanggang sa dumating yung araw na pinalitan na yung employer namin.
I am so grateful to God na wala na ang dating employer namin.
The workers were already paid until such time I decided to return home,201d she added.

Reyes went back to Davao City in 2011 for good.
She said she continued as tailor in her own shop, and now she has her own helpers.
Reyes is a purok leader, too, in Ulas from 2013 up to this present.

At her age, Reyes said, she is already happy and contented with her life.

She was also proud to say that her four children already completed their college degrees.

Beach wedding for Bajau couples in time of Valentine's day , Beach wedding for Bajau couples in time of Valentine's day 
 CAGAYAN DE ORO.
A bride performs a bridal dance as other people place peso bills between the bride2019s finger as part of the traditional Badjau wedding rite during the Bajau mass wedding at a beach resort in Barangay Bayabas, February 13, 2016.
  
Pamela Jay F.
Orias, AFTER more than five years of living together out of marriage, couple Sorayma and Arman Aralmani finally tied the knot together with 15 other Bajau couples in a mass wedding celebrated by an Imam at a beach resort in Barangay Bayabas, Cagayan de Oro City.

The Aralmani couple who lives at Saint John in Barangay Puntod has been helped by the city government to make their union official.
Sorayma, 25, shared how hard it was for her to live with a man whom she hardly knew since Sorayma and Arman went through an 2018arrange union.2019
"Sa sulod sa walo ka bulan, wala gyud ko nahigugma ana niya, hangtud nakita nako unsa siya makapasalig sa tanang trabahoon ug unsa iyang pagmahal sa among unang anak didto na dayon ko naka-feel ug gugma ," Sorayma said in an interview.
Sorayma, close to tears, shared how thankful she was as the City Government shouldered the expenses to make their wedding possible.
She had since been dreaming of their wedding day, which for her makes their union strong and unbreakable.
"Lahi ra man kung kasal gyud mo, kay kung wala gani, murag sama ra mo sa mga hayop.
Ug kung wala moy kasal, ang inyong anak sama ra pud sa hayop ," Sorayma said.
"Daku gyud among pasalamat, nga bisan kami pobre, unya ubos pa gyud ang pagtan-aw sa amo sa mga tao kay kami Bajau, gipahalagahan gihapon mi nila  give us importance)," she added.
Officiated by an Imam, the wedding rites started with the Bajau traditional dance performed by both men and women followed by the unique wedding ritual.
During the ceremony, the man, assisted by the Imam, searched for his pair among the women in the line.
Once the man found his pair, he would then place his thumb in her forehead to signify 'belongingness' or 'oneness' of the couple.
After that, they shared their 'bangkete sa kasal'  prepared by the city government together with the sponsors.
Dr.
Merle Adaza of the City Social Welfare and Development  said it is the first time in the history of Cagayan de Oro.
"Karon pa gyud na sa history sa syudad na gihatag bili ang mga Bajau.
Karun ra pud na hatagan sila ug luna o lugar na matawag nila ug ila ," Adaza said.
Adaza was referring to the coming relocation wherein about 500 Bajau individuals from Barangay Puntod will be transferred to their new abode in Barangay Bayabas.
"This symbolizes new beginning, new hope, a new start for them," Adaza added.
Rediscovering the Church as Mercy , Rediscovering the Church as Mercy 
Photo by Robert Z.
Cortes
Robert Z.
Cortes, ONCE a year, for the last 30 years, I have had the good fortune of attending a spiritual retreat.
A traditional annual practice of piety highly recommended for every Christian, good retreats help those who make them replenish their spiritual -- at times, even physical -- strength, as they reflect on the eternal truths and see life in its proper perspective.
Oftentimes, it's not a matter of discovering new things, but of seeing old ideas in a new light.
This year, for example, one of the main insights I received was this: belonging to the Church is both blessing and responsibility.
Old message, I know, even hackneyed.
Yet it came in the fresh, new form of "mercy," in circumstances that can only be described as "dramatic," and suddenly, everything was totally "new."
The time and venue of the retreat surely had something to do with it.
Just in time for Lent, my retreat was held in a quaint, little Italian town north of Rome called San Felice d'Ocre.
It's a beautiful place where tall and erect pine trees surround the retreat house, and from which one sees a majestic range of mountains partly covered with snow.
It was then early February, but it seemed that winter had left, the first two days being quite sunny and pleasantly cool.
But in the morning of the third day, I woke up with my room much colder.
In fact, I desisted from opening the bedroom window.
On my way to the chapel, looking out the corridor windows, I saw that it was snowing.
But it wasn't the snowfall of anyone's dreams, unless one refers to a nightmare.
It's not one of those that end up in a soft white mound from which one would make a jolly Frosty, the Snowman.
Instead, this was a swirling confusion that looked like it was belched by the gray, angry-looking clouds above.
Or the leavings of a tepid, indecisive winter that was rushing to the bathroom on its way out, but didn't quite make it.
What ended up on the red concrete was messy slush, the perfect representation of everything that was outside that morning: cold, wet, and gloomy.
"How different it is inside," I thought, as I entered the chapel.
The low, curved ceiling that smoothly made its way down and eventually became the wall made one feel like one was in a catacomb, but a warm and pleasant one.
The warmth came mainly from the very efficient heating system, of course, yet I felt there was more to that here.
It was definitely not a cozy place, as no place of worship should be, and the heavy, brown wooden benches, made less austere only by the thin, green seat and kneeling cushions, were there to tell you that.
But one immediately felt that in this place one's soul could rest.
It was a place like home.
The general color of the whole chapel was off-white and beige, brought about by the clean walls, ceiling, and floor made of marble and white-painted cement.
But what could have been very drab walls was given life by a charming salmon and sea-green ginkgo-leaf pattern.
From the ceiling hung two gigantic bronze chandeliers with yellow LED lights ensconced in transparent sea-green diffusers.
However, even at the threshold of the heavy, oaken door, one's eyes were invariably riveted to the sanctuary, as if by necessity.
One had to be unconscious for one's attention not to be immediately caught by the spectacular and massive gold-leafed reredos.
Scenes from the life the Blessed Virgin were woven, as it were, into this wooden tapestry of red, blue, and gold with elegant splashes of green.
Exquisitely integrating them into a whole was the imposing figure of Our Lady, Seat of Wisdom, in the middle.
And right below the painting, was the real focal point of the chapel: a golden tabernacle lined across the middle with semi-precious stones, holding within it the Lord of Heaven and Earth.
This was the hearth of this home.
The sheer beauty of this small church reminded me once more what a beautiful home the Church is.
As a cradle Catholic, I realized, my good fortune has been that not only have I had a home which I never left, but also that this home has been kept warm by a Flame that neither burns nor dies out.
Moreover, from my childhood, I have been surrounded by graces and benefits that only the Church can afford: beauty in its liturgy, consolation in its sacraments, certitude of truth in its doctrine, and the sublime example and intercession of Her saints.
All that came together here.
Yet in such beauty and warmth, one can very easily stop there and be satisfied, thinking that the Church is only to be enjoyed.
Or say with Peter as he stood still, stupefied by the beauty of the Transfiguration, "It is good for us to be here.
Let us build three tents..." - and remain inside.
Or, as St.
John Paul II said, "to fold in upon oneself." But Pope Francis has reminded us that the Church is a field hospital.
This means that "Church troops" -- that's you and I -- must go out there in the messy slush, where it is cold, wet, and gloomy.
Out of ourselves, that is, to encounter souls and bring to them the mercy of Christ.
Where to go, and as what? Each of us has a specific position and mission, one designed for him or her that no one else can replace: a calling.
A professional is sent to his colleagues and place of work; the student to his classmates; Mother Teresa's Missionary of Charity to the poorest of the poor; the mother to her husband and children; the bishop and priest to their flock; the politician to his constituents; the cloistered nun and monk, in their prayers and work, to the whole Church.
And the encounter with each soul is not a matter of "converting" him or her, but of being available to them as Christ was to that blind man.
He asked, "What would you have me do?" to suggest to us that in the Christian apostolate it is the other person who matters, not our plans.
So this is the challenge to us who belong to the Church in this "age of Francis": to show how much we appreciate the gift of the Faith given to us by Christ by being the authentic image of his mercy to those whom we encounter.
This certainly needs a lot spiritual calories.
One needs to prepare interiorly before launching out, otherwise one falls either into the folly of activism or the ditch of despair.
The good news is that this is not impossible to do.
Pope Francis reminds us that these "spiritual calories" are nothing but the mercy we have in our soul, and "to prepare interiorly" really just means that one experience mercy oneself so that he or she can give it.

Lent is arguably one of the best moments to do that.
By going confession or maybe attending a retreat, one opens himself or herself to experience God's mercy.
And although your eventual divine encounter may not have the dramatic backdrop of snow-covered mountains, as with everything that God does, it is bound to surprise you.

I am peace , I am peace 
DAVAO.
The garden at the Agong House in Kapatagan, Digos City, has new installations declaring it as a Land of Peace.
Stella A.
Estremera, THERE'S a movement among a growing group of individuals in Davao rooted from long years of drumming up interest on peace.
This movement is seeking to encourage Mindanaoans to declare they are peace personified and not just that they are for peace.
"It's a declaration.
It goes beyond just saying that we are for peace," artist Rey Mudjahid "Kublai" Ponce Millan said in explaining the concept that he and his friends are working on.
At the start, the manifestations of these individual declarations will be seen at the Francisco Bangoy International Airport after businessman Alex P.
Montanez of the APM Ad & Promo Management, which manages all the billboards inside the Davao airport for the Civil Aviation Authority .
He's going to sponsor valuable billboard spaces to give way to murals by local artists, similar to the mural on the corridor going to Gates 6-8 of the pre-departure area, but this time with a clear message about peace.
"Mindanao has always been regarded as the land of promise," Millan said, "but this time, we are saying this is the land of peace and we are peace." 
It has been in the works since a few years back with a group of artists gathered under the name Artists Helping Artists .
Several group exhibits have been tagged at Abreeza Mall in 2013 and 2014, as the initial foray into popularizing art that speaks of Mindanao's beauty and bounty and of its people.
But the whole concept was still in the making, the idea still being threshed out, and the momentum being gathered to bring in more and more like-minded people who see into the heart of every Mindanaoan and find beauty there instead of conflict.
The Land of Promise was the blurb coined when the Philippine legislature passed the homestead program in 1903, which allowed enterprising tenants to acquire a farm of at least 16 hectares for as long as they cultivate it and make this productive.
While the program was intended nationwide, real implementation was introduced only in Northern Luzon and parts of Mindanao because these regions still had available public alienable and disposable lands.
National Land Settlement Administration , created through Commonwealth Act.
No.
441, continued the Homestead Program, in 1939.
This homestead programs throughout the three decades created a massive wave of migration to Mindanao.
The core group is of the conviction that this should have long evolved into a fulfillment of that promise.
The most "peaceful" way of achieving this can only be through the arts that seek out the positive.
In April last year, the core group drafted a peace manifesto of sorts, although still unpolished, it somehow encapsulates the very idea on which the I Am Peace movement is rooted on.
The manifesto read:
I EMBRACE
the notion of Mindanao as the Land of Peace.

The Almighty - Dios, Allah, and Magbabaya - has gifted the land with peace.
 All its people considers Mindanao their home.
Its peace is being fulfilled by the Lumad, the Moro and the descendants of the migrants, who converged for a common good.

I BELIEVE
that Mindanao Is truly a domain of Peace.

Tensions, conflicts and divisions have made Mindanao bleed, and still it is..

Even so, I have more reasons to be steadfast and look forward tomorrow when shadows will yield to light, when tears will turn to laughter, when war disappear and Peace will reign.

Collectively, Mindanao's possibilities will be explored by everyone - who gaze the precious Peace of the Land.

I HOPE AND PRAY
that Mindanao and its people in unison will journey towards a Peace-filled Land.

When the fruits of the land will be justly distributed among its peoples.

When peasants have land, workers have jobs and families' needs are well provided.

When the governance system will favor no one but will instead protect the rights of everyone.

When those who look after the people's security will truly respect their human rights of everyone.

When the Mindanawons can truly respect and value each other's ethnicities, cultural and faith traditions.

When we can safeguard nature and cultures as legacies for the coming generations.

When women find themselves reclaiming the roles of our foremothers and nurturing these even further.

When our children can run free and frolic across its mountains, hills, plains, seas, lakes and rivers.

I PLEDGE
to do my part, within the capabilities that the Almighty has bestowed me, to
Practice and live up the demands of Peace, 
Contribute to the fulfillment of these Possibilities
and to be truly part of this hope-filled
Journey towards Peace, Harmony, Justice, Equality and Freedom.

Hinaut pa unta! Harinawa KALINAW! 
I AM FOR PEACE.

A year later, saying, "I am for peace" is deemed not enough.
Millan is working with both student and professional artists, who are willing to volunteer their time and talent to make these murals at the ticketing counter, the VIP lounge, and the arrival area within the next few months.
In the meantime, the core group will be setting up billboards on peace that is more than just saying no to war, but individually but as a collective declaring, "I am peace."
These will feature Millan's works at the Agong House in barangay Kapatagan in Digos City, which has housed his creations about Mindanao life and the positive thoughts he has been nurturing since 2003.
His most recent addition to this rolling terrain full of his artworks is the "Land of Peace" garden created in 2015.
Aside from the billboard spaces that will soon be converted into art spaces inside the airport, the FBIA management has also given the go-signal to have a set of sculptures on Mindanao and peace on the ground where the sign "Davao International Airport" is at the entrance driveway.
The whole idea is to fill just about every available space with art on peace in the city, and hopefully, this will catch on and encourage everyone to stop, appreciate beauty, and then declare that he or she too is peace personified.
Pampanga: 2018Most beautiful, richest2019, Pampanga: 2018Most beautiful, richest2019CITY OF SAN FERNANDO -- There was a time when Pampanga was considered the fairest -- and richest -- of all.
And the fabled reputation was written for all the world to know by a French adventurer Jean Mallat in his book 201cThe Philippines201d during the 18th\xa0century.
201cAll the world,201d of course, meant the Europe of old dominated by Spain and Portugal, countries that virtually partitioned the new world between them.
201cThe province of Pampanga is the most beautiful and richest in the Philippines,201d Mallat wrote.
201cAnd for this reason, it has been called New Spain.201d
It was a new name the province shared with another Spanish colony in South America -- Chile.
At the time, Mallat counted 27 pueblos  comprising the province, six of which are now parts of Tarlac , Bulacan  and Nueva Ecija .
Mt.
Arayat, Mallat said, was one of the most noteworthy mountains in the province.
Apparently, Mt.
Pinatubo was just another, ordinary part of the landscape until about two centuries later.
But that2019s another chapter in Pampanga2019s history altogether.

201cFrom Manila,201d he wrote, 201cone recognizes distinctly its pyramidal point, its flanks extend widely to the environs and its peak looks like the opening of vast crater.201d Mt.
Arayat is considered a dead volcano.
Most of the rivers of Pampanga, according to Mallat, rolled gold, 201c ut most of all, those of Abayon, Matalantang and Cabiao; the waters of some others contain ferruginous material, notably near San Miguel, where iron is very abundant and found even at ground level.201d
As to the Kapampangans at the time, Mallat was captivated by the Bacolorenos.
201cThe people there are good-looking,201d he said.
Bacolor was the capital of Pampanga then.
He added: 201cThis capital was surrounded by a great number of noted for the fertility of their soil and the beauty of their sceneries.201d
Mallat divided Pampanga into two parts, upper and lower.
Upper Pampanga, from Sta.
Ana extending to Pangasinan and Nueva Ecija, was scantily irrigated 201cbecause rivers have a very rapid course there.201d Lower Pampanga was very fertile and well populated; its plantations delightful and its temperature very pleasant.
Then as now, floods inundated parts of the province.
201cCourses of water descending from Mt.
Arayat are only streams during the dry season but become impetuous torrents during the rainy period.
It is also during this period that through the meeting of the rains with the rivers is formed the pinac of Candava.201d
Mallat, for some reason, failed to mention anything about the now famous migratory birds that flock regularly to modern Candaba.
Instead, he wrote about the dalag.
 201cIt is more or less during this period that they catch in this lake a great quantity of dalacs, a fish of which the Indios are extremely fond of and which is in fact delicious.201d
Of its natural products, Mallat said the province was distinguished by its tobacco, indigo, tuba, a kind of dark sugar and jams, tapa, pots of baked clay and even lime, among others.
Nearly two hundred years later after, has Pampanga retained its old fame and glory as beheld by Mallat?
Another Mallat may provide the answer.
Daluyon resort is 3rd time Asean Green Hotel awardee, Daluyon resort is 3rd time Asean Green Hotel awardee
Contributed photo
AT THE recent Asean Tourism Forum 2016 held in Sofitel Philippine Plaza, Manila, Daluyon Beach and Mountain Resort was awarded for the third time in a row the Asean Green Hotel Award.
Daluyon Beach and Mountain Resort, which is located on Sabang Beach beside the Puerto Princesa Underground River, is the only resort in Palawan to receive the distinguished Asean Award.
Receiving the Award for Daluyon Beach and Mountain Resort is CEO Butch Tan from Department of Tourism Secretary Ramon Jimenez Jr.

Manila holds the first-ever Sustainable Seafood Week, Manila holds the first-ever Sustainable Seafood WeekMANILA -- Top hotels and restaurants in Manila joined hands with different environmental groups and fisheries non-government organizations to put their commitment onto the plates by organizing the first-ever Sustainable Seafood Week taking place from February 15 to 21.
The Sustainable Seafood Week is a celebration of food and a venue for sharing the best practices in sustainable fisheries by various stakeholders.
The event also seeks to raise awareness among seafood consumers on the problems plaguing Philippine seas, particularly on the issue of unsustainable fishing practices that not only harm the marine environment but also threaten the country2019s fisheries industry.
201cIn the last 15 years, I realized that working with sustainable products was not only my responsibility as a person, but a bigger responsibility as a chef,201d said Chef Chele Gonzalez of Gallery Vask.
201cSustainability plays a huge role in our philosophy as we want to preserve the raw products of the Philippines and this includes the local seafood.
We have to relay this message not just within the food and beverage industry but more importantly to the public and to our guests who eat our food.
It is good for them to know that they are contributing to the sea2019s sustainability and are creating an environment of change with every plate.201d
201cTraceability is the core of our Artesmar Yellowfin Fishery Improvement Program for tuna.
Fully traceable sourcing, production and delivery procedures ensure that consumers will have access to information around our tuna products -- from where our fish was caught to the status of the stock, including the name of fishers.
This ensures that the marine environment will not be harmed so we can all enjoy fish, while equitably helping the municipal fishers with profitable livelihood,201d said Christian Schmidradner, general manager of Meliomar Inc., and one of the organizers of the event.
The event was also welcomed by fisherfolk groups as it solidified the commitment of top hotels and restaurants to sustainable fisheries and allows them to gain access to high end markets in Manila.
201cThis is a huge validation for fisherfolk communities who have been struggling to fight for our rights and our place in the sun,201d said Jeremie Jumao-as, a local fisherfolk from Samahan ng mga Manggagawa sa Tunahan Sablayan in Occidental Mindoro.
201cThe continued patronage by these hotels and restaurants will allow us to inform and train our fellow fishers on the proper way to catch fish to continue supplying quality seafood to both local and foreign markets.201d
201cThe Sustainable Seafood Week is a wonderful collaboration by stakeholders and shows a strong desire to help our seas recover from overfishing and ecosystems degradation,201d said Vince Cinches, Oceans Campaigner for Greenpeace Philippines.
201cWe urge the government and the rest of the players in the fisheries sector to play an active role and find ways to champion the marine environment to ensure that we will always have seafood to enjoy and savor now and in the future.201d
The Sustainable Seafood Week will have various activities happening in various high-end partner hotels and restaurants.
These include fisheries and environmental presentations, chef classes and technical workshops on what sustainable seafood is all about.
For more information, please go to www.Facebook.com/SustainableSeafoodWeekph 
Giving Cebu a shot, Giving Cebu a shotI AM from Mindanao and spent almost all my life there, except when I reviewed and was hired here in Cebu.
I have been here for almost a year and it only took me some time to get used to and eventually love the island.
I am away from the home that I know.
Far from the comfort of living with my family and the ways of life that I was accustomed to.
In my first months, there was a lot to learn like navigating through the city2019s streets, getting to know the language, the food, the culture and the people, basic stuff.
Cebu was such a foreign place for me.
READ MORE.
Singles celebrate!, Singles celebrate!
LIFESTYLE CHOICE.
Being single is a lifestyle choice and flourishing career paths are keeping them busy and excited.
Nicole Batucan is a community manager, sports and travel enthusiast, whereas her namesake Nicole Blackman is a freelance model, actress, musician and songwriter.
Alex Eturma is a freelance associate producer and writer, occasional stylist, and makeup artist, while Ivy Gallur is a physician2019s assistant, theater performer, musician and ballet instructor.
Deneb R.
Batucan, Four lovely women who love every minute of singlehood
, IT2019S that time of the year again when all you seem to hear on the radio are love songs.
Hearts, flowers and cuddly things grow like mushrooms here and there as the warm February evening air envelopes you into a love-filled embrace.
Valentine2019s Day has come, and just like any other year, the ladies swoon as the lads try and fumble their way to make their best lady smile.
But let2019s look at the other side of the coin.
As much as there are tons of couples in this world, so are there many single men and women who are probably dreading this lovey-dovey occasion.
But should they?
Sun.Star Weekend rounded up four gorgeous Cebuanas who are loving every minute of their singlehood.
These single ladies are young, independent and free 2014 and they2019re here to explain to us why being single isn2019t as dreadful as some may say and shouldn2019t be shunned as some sad lifestyle choice.
READ MORE
2018Happiest Pinoy2019 inspires 728 honor students, 2018Happiest Pinoy2019 inspires 728 honor studentsIN 2010, he was named the 201cHappiest Pinoy.201d It was no surprise that his message during the 58th Annual Honors Day Convocation graced by 728 recipients of different academic awards centered on the value of 201chappiness.201d
Winston A.
Maxino, a corporate executive and a Sillimanian, spoke to an audience composed of honor students and their respective families on February 15 at the Silliman University Gymnasium.
His speech was powerful, inspiring and at the same time humorous.
This year2019s Convocation conferred 33 University Honors, 103 College Honors and 592 Class Honors.
It also recognized recipients of co-curricular awards:
* Most Outstanding Student of the Year -- Amyrrha M.
Estolloso 
* University Leadership Award -- Joyce Mae M.
Pino  
* University Service Award -- Loushan Ne\xf1a G.
Pis-an 
* University Glunz Endeavor Award -- Reyshiel N.
Saldo 
* Freshman Student of the Year -- Carlisle Naudin T.
Caroro 
* Sophomore Student of the Year -- Christian Denzel T.
Sagun 
* Junior Student of the Year -- Genin Raya V.
Amiscaray 
* Senior Student of the Year -- Michiko Je M.
Bito-on 
Many were moved by Maxino2019s experiences, including suffering from a debilitating disease called ankylosing spondylitis, and how despite all that he had gone through, he remained optimistic and decided to face life with a smile.

A student in Silliman from kindergarten to college, graduating with a degree in Political Science in 1983, Maxino shared how he thought the invitation to be the Honors Day speaker was fitting.
He was not new to the Honors Day in Silliman -- he was a consistent honor student himself and was named Most Outstanding Student of the Year in his senior year in college.

201cGets na gets ko,201d he quipped, referring to the feeling that the 728 honor students before him were having.
Being a parent to children who are achievers, Maxino said he could also place himself in the shoes of loved ones in the audience who were eager to cheer on their children as they receive their certificates and medals on stage.
His entire speech  revolved around the positive topic of 201chappiness201d -- what he can be considered an expert of, after he was picked in 2010 from among hundreds of nominees as the 201cHappiest Pinoy201d in the country.

So Maxino asked: 201cHow do we stay happy even during the worst circumstances of our lives?201d
201cIf Ms.
Universe Pia Wurtzbach is confidently beautiful with a heart, I lay claim to being confidently handsome2026 with a heart2026 problem,201d he said, soliciting giggles from the audience.
  
Since childhood, Maxino said he was physically ill.
He was battling with asthma, osteoporosis, allergic rhinitis, and the incurable and debilitating disease called ankylosing spondylitis, a form of spinal arthritis.
At age 26, he was diagnosed with a serious case of hypertension.
But while there were many reasons for him to feel down, he chose to stay strong and happy.
He said life is a matter of choice, and so he made the choice of happiness.
While many think it is a mere feeling, happiness, Maxino said, is more than what beats and jumps from within.

201cHappiness is more than just a feeling; happiness is an energy that moves people to positive action that benefits others.
Happy people want to make others happy,201d he stressed.

And happiness 201cdoes not require grand gestures or a supreme sacrifice.201d 201cHappiness can circulate from doing the small and simple acts that show you care -- from greeting people warmly with a smile, from saying a well-deserved praise, from thanking people, from encouraging the hopeless, from guiding the lost, from comforting the grieving, from sharing with the needy, from taking the time to listen, and many more,201d he added.

Driving his message closer to the campus that he called home, Maxino also talked about the ultimate source of happiness common to all Sillimanians -- the 201cHappiness Seed.201d
This 201cHappiness Seed201d is the Silliman motto: Via, Veritas, Vita.
He said the Silliman motto has been his guide, giving him 201cthe indomitable Silliman spirit201d that sustained him throughout his years.

Maxino also highlighted in his speech the life-changing gift that he received in his daughter, Brina, who was born with Down Syndrome.
His daughter2019s condition at first pushed him to question God.
But over time, he embraced how Brina was a blessing from God.
It was that transformation of his view of his daughter2019s condition, from what he originally thought would be a burden to it being a blessing, that he considers to be the most important decision he had ever made in his entire life.
Brina turned out to be an excellent student.
She graduated class valedictorian from a regular high school and is now taking up AB History in college.
Brina currently serves as the first Filipino Special Olympics Global Youth Ambassador representing Asia-Pacific.
In August 2014, Brina was invited to a dinner at the White House with US President Barack Obama.
So how do we stay happy during worst circumstances?
In answering that question, Maxino reflected on the Silliman motto, Via, Veritas, Vita: 201cVia: Have faith that God is on your side and trust that He will turn your burdens into blessings.
Veritas: maintain your integrity and always do the right thing to keep a peaceful mind.
Vita: let your suffering bear fruit to transform you into a happier and more loving person who enriches the lives of others.201d 
Maxino concluded his speech by giving a tip on how to harness the force of happiness in all endeavors.
Using the University President2019s first name, he said students should always 201cBEN.201d
201cWe need to B 2013 believe we possess it, E 2013 endure the hardships and N 2013 never give up.
In short, B 2013 believe, E 2013 endure and N 2013 never give up,201d he said.

Q&A: As Zika rages in the Americas, should Asia be worried?, Q&A: As Zika rages in the Americas, should Asia be worried?
In this Feb.
15, 2016, photo, thermographic measurement against Zika virus is conducted at Narita international airport in Narita, near Tokyo.

ZIKA virus continues to rage in the Americas, and the World Health Organization has declared it a global health emergency.
Taiwan has recently issued a travel advisory for Thailand, warning expectant mothers or women trying to get pregnant to postpone their trips there.
But how big of a concern is Zika virus for Asia? Here's what you need to know:
Q: Has Zika virus been a problem in the Asia-Pacific Region in the past?
A: The disease was first identified in 1947 in a monkey in the Zika forest of Uganda.
The virus has been found in Asia as far back as the 1960s.
It has appeared in Indonesia, Malaysia, India, Cambodia, Vietnam, Thailand, the Philippines and Pakistan, but no widespread cases have been reported and symptoms have typically been mild and similar to dengue and chikungunya, which may have helped mask its presence.
Up until the first outbreak in 2007, only 14 cases were reported globally.

The outbreak occurred on the Pacific island of Yap in Micronesia, where an estimated three-quarters of the population had been infected.
No hospitalizations or lasting health issues were reported.
In 2013 and 2014, outbreaks again hit the Pacific, including Easter Island, the Cook Islands and New Caledonia.
In French Polynesia, an increase in a neurological disorder called Guillain-Barre syndrome coincided with the outbreak.
In 2015, the virus was reported in Vanuatu, Fiji, the Solomon Islands and Samoa.
Q: Are there any cases in Asia and the Pacific now?  Are precautions being taken?
A: Thailand has reported one case, and active transmission is occurring on the Pacific islands of American Samoa and Samoa.
Tonga has declared a Zika epidemic after five cases were confirmed and more than 260 suspected infections were identified.
Other imported cases have popped up in the region, mostly from tourists returning from Zika-endemic areas.
However, many more cases have likely gone undetected or been misdiagnosed as dengue or chikungunya, which are also spread by the same type of mosquito -- the Aedes aegypti -- and have similar symptoms of headache, fever rash and joint pain.
An estimated eight out of 10 people infected with Zika experience no symptoms at all.
After a Thai migrant worker was diagnosed with the disease in Taiwan, health officials there issued a February 14 travel advisory warning expectant mothers or women trying to get pregnant to put off traveling to Thailand, and for men to wear condoms after returning to avoid potentially spreading the virus via sex.
But Dr.
Nick White, a tropical disease expert who has researched mosquito-borne diseases for decades at Thailand's Mahidol University, called Taiwan's travel guidance "excessive."
He said Thailand is being singled out for having good surveillance and fast case reporting compared to other countries in the region, "but to say that it would be worse to come here than say, Cambodia, Vietnam, Myanmar, Laos, Indonesia or Malaysia, there's absolutely no evidence of that at all," he said.
Q: What is microcephaly and Guillain-Barre Syndrome? How are they linked to Zika?
A: Babies with microcephaly are born with small heads, and their brains may not have developed properly.
The condition can lead to seizures, learning disabilities, developmental problems, cerebral palsy, vision problems and other issues.
Guillain-Barre syndrome is an autoimmune disorder where the body attacks the nervous system.
People of all ages can be affected.
The condition causes weakness and loss of sensation or tingling in the arms and legs and sometimes elsewhere on the body.
Most people recover from it, but it can cause paralysis or death.

Scientists are researching the potential link between microcephaly, Guillain-Barre and Zika virus to try to understand it better.
"We don't know enough about it," White said, adding it's unclear whether the exact same virus circulating in the Americas is also prevalent in Asia.
"No one has identified rampant microcephaly anywhere else, so I think we need to know a lot more about it before panicking."
Q: What can be done to prevent Zika infection?
A: Experts say the same precautions to prevent dengue, chickungunya and other mosquito-borne diseases should be taken.
Eliminate mosquito breeding grounds by not allowing water to collect around the home in roof gutters, flower pots or other containers.
Use insect repellant and wear long-sleeve shirts, pants and socks, especially during key Aedes mosquito feeding times in the morning, late afternoon or evening.
Some health agencies, including the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, have issued guidance for pregnant women to avoid traveling to areas experiencing Zika outbreaks and for men returning from affected countries to wear condoms or abstain from sex with pregnant women.
Sexual transmission of the Zika virus has occurred in rare cases.
There is currently no vaccine or specific treatment for Zika virus.

El Ni\xf1o, a weather phenomenon, El Ni\xf1o, a weather phenomenon
Sun.Star file photo
Nicko Tubo, WHEN the temperature between the ocean and atmosphere changes, two phases of the El Ni\xf1o Southern Oscillation  cycle can be created, namely, El Ni\xf1o and La Ni\xf1a.
Enso is the fluctuations in temperature between the ocean and atmosphere in central and eastern Equatorial Pacific.
The cold phase of Enso is referred to as La Ni\xf1a, while the warm phase of the cycle is known as El Ni\xf1o, which the Philippines is now experiencing.

The El Ni\xf1o weather phenomenon occurs in the Pacific basin every two to nine years.
It often starts between December to February and lasts until first half of the following year.
However, it may be experienced longer.
El Ni\xf1o is usually followed by La Ni\xf1a, as rainfall fluctuations associated with it tend to occur again at the time of the year.
According to the Philippine Atmospheric, Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration , different parts of the Philippines may experience varying rainfall impacts.

The prolonged drought spell affects the normal rainfall pattern in the country, resulting in reduced rainfall and fewer but stronger typhoons entering the country.
Pagasa is closely monitoring the oceanic and atmospheric conditions in the tropical Pacific that could lead to possible development of El Ni\xf1o.

Pagasa furnishes rainfall outlook, updates, and advisories for the different parts of the country.
The weather state bureau classified the areas affected by El Ni\xf1o into dry condition, dry spell, and drought.
Dry condition is defined as two consecutive months of below normal rainfall condition, dry spell means rainfall condition in the area is below normal for three months, while drought is referred as three succeeding months of way below normal rainfall status.
Here is a list of provinces affected by El Ni\xf1o as of January 31, 2016:
Dry condition: Compostela Valley, Surigao del Norte, and Surigao del Sur.
Dry spell: Catanduanes, Capiz, Iloilo, Negros Oriental, Siquijor, eastern Samar, Bukidnon, Lanao del Norte, Davao del Sur, Davao Oriental, Sarangani, and Lanao del Sur.
Drought: Palawan, Aklan, Antique, Guimaras, northern Samar, Samar , Zamboanga del Norte, Zamboanga del Sur, Zamboanga Sibugay, Misamis Occidental, South Cotabato, North Cotabato, Sultan Kudarat, Basilan, Maguindanao, Sulu, and Tawi-Tawi.
Here are the provinces likely to be affected by El Ni\xf1o by the end of February 2016:
Dry condition: Abra, Benguet, Kalinga, Mountain Province, Pangasinan, Nueva Ecija, Oriental Mindoro, Romblon, Albay, Camarines Sur, Masbate, Sorsogon, Bohol, Agusan del Norte, Agusan del Sur.
Dry spell: Rizal, Catanduanes, Camiguin, Misamis Oriental, Compostela Valley, Davao del Sur, Davao Oriental, Surigao del Norte, Surigao del Sur.
Drought: Palawan, Antique, Capiz, Guimaras, Iloilo, Negros Oriental, Siquijor, eastern Samar, northern Samar, Samar , Zamboanga del Norte, Zamboanga del Sur, Zamboanga Sibugay, Bukidnon, Lanao del Norte, Misamis Occidental, south Cotabato, north Cotabato, Sarangani, Sultan Kuldarat, Basilan, Maguindanao, Lanao del Sur, Sulu, Tawi-Tawi.
Areas affected by El Ni\xf1o
The Department of Social Welfare and Development  said that in Northern Mindanao, Bukidnon has the most number of families affected by El Ni\xf1o, with farmers, laborers and forest workers numbering 52,282, followed by Misamis Oriental with 38,170 families, Lanao del Norte - 38,160, Misamis Occidental - 14,555, and Camiguin with 3,658 families.
DSWD said P304 million worth of assistance was prepared to assist areas in Northern Mindanao affected by the weather phenomenon.
The Zamboanga City Agriculture Office said that as of February 6, 2016, 750.34 hectares of crops worth P14.02 million in the city were damaged by El Ni\xf1o.
In Davao City, its Disaster Risk Reduction and Management chief Emmauel Jaldon, in an interview with Sun.Star Davao, said state of calamity will not be declared yet, as the impact of El Ni\xf1o on crops is not severe enough.
Pagasa Mactan in Cebu recorded on February 10 the highest temperature in the province for the month at 31.6 degrees Celsius.
Conserving water
The National Water Resources Board and the Department of Environment and Natural Resources gave tips on how to conserve water during El Ni\xf1o.

Pagasa said El Ni\xf1o might worsen from moderate to strong during the first quarter of 2016, and will start to weaken between March 20 and June 19.

***
Sources: Gov.ph, DOST-Pagasa, NWRB, DENR, US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.

Ignite your inner light with Parvati2019s 2018I Am Light2019, Ignite your inner light with Parvati2019s 2018I Am Light2019RISING to number 1 on the Canadian Electronica charts and voted Canada2019s best new musical artist, the Canadian musician, yogi, activist and author Parvati is touring Asia and Oceania in April to promote her new single "I Am Light," debuting on Asia Pop 40 radio across Asia on March 15.
Parvati has performed in stadiums, festivals and clubs throughout North America and Europe and is the first performer to ever sing at the North Pole, where she went for climate change awareness.

201cI Am Light201d is a sparkling, catchy, beautifully self-produced feel great pop song.
Parvati spearheads a revolutionary new music genre that reaches the pop and New Age markets alike.
Her work has been likened to 201cNew New Age201d or CEDM .
The sonic sunshine of 201cI Am Light,201d radiant with lush electronic sounds and Parvati2019s angelic voice, is simultaneously reminiscent of both Madonna and Enya at their best.

201cI Am Light201d incorporates the Buddhist mantra 201cgate gate paragate parasamgate bodhi swaha201d , said to be the exclamation of a monk at the moment of their enlightenment.
Parvati says, 201cThe mantra speaks to me about the reality that everything in life is made of light and we are part of this gorgeous interconnected fabric of light.
Light is what we really are.
It is our true nature.201d
The luminous music video, weaving together city street scenes with a concert hall and moments in an enchanted forest, introduces Parvati2019s fantastical character Natamba, a goddess from Avalon who manifests as a being of liquid gold light who brings light to Earth, where she is discovered by forest fairies and a child who passes the light to the rest of the world.
This joy-filled video will be released March 15 along with the single.
Adding to the illumination is an upcoming 201cI Am Light201d 3D game app for iOS and Android.
The 201cI Am Light201d EP, demonstrating the breadth of Parvati2019s musical mastery and spiritual understanding, will be released in April.
It will feature dance, radio and acoustic versions of this song, as well as a guided chakra meditation to ambient electronic music.

201cParvati is as radical and creative as David Bowie, and as beautiful and pure as an angel,201d said Rishi Deva, gold record music manager, music columnist and record label CEO.
201cParvati is a unique phenomenon in the music industry.
She is someone who brings together music, spirituality, physical and mental health and a social conscience! Her commitment is total and she deserves to be a huge success,201d said Chris Porter, David Bowie2019s producer.
For Tom Silverman, pioneer of Hip Hop, Tommy Boy Records and The New Music Seminar, Music Hall of Fame, 201cParvati brings much needed consciousness to the dance floor and she does it on multiple levels.201d 
Learn more about the song, view the teaser video and more: https://parvati.tv/i-am-light/
Find out more about the tour: https://parvati.tv/events-i-am-light-asia-tour/
For more information or for interview requests, contact Denisse Corloncito  at denisse@kupidsplay.com and +1 647 896 3164; Anita Rex  at anita@kupidsplay.com and +1 647 978 9009; and Pranada Devi  at pranada@kupidsplay.com  and +1 416 805 9894.

A positive life    , A positive life    Karina V.
Canedo, AS FITNESS instructor, the battle is not just about staying fit, but to stay alive.
 
For Nash Villa, 26, a fitness instructor at Plana Forma, dancing and maintaining a healthy lifestyle is more than just a job.

It is a statement of survival.
Standing tall with imposing muscles, no one can guess that Villa for 10 years now, is positive of Human Immunodeficiency Virus , but this never hindered Villa to reach out for more and encourage other people to be fit, and this also did not stop him to show the world his amazing dancing skills.

201cNaisip ko kasi na hindi ibig sabihin na kung ganyan ka titigil ang mundo mo.
Nakita ko rin naman na maraming naniniwala sa akin sa talent ko, maraming sumusuporta that is why mas na challenge ako but it2019s not that easy,201d Villa said.

He said that he worked hard as a performer despite his condition sucht hat many still seek him out.

201cKahit ganito aking condition maraming nagha-hire sa akin to do this and that.
Sa mga engagements ini-invite ako for dancing,201d Villa said.

Villa said he performs aerial silk, jazz, ballet, and contemporary Hiphop, he is also a member of a dance company that teaches all ages.

201cI kept on performing even though nakita na nila ako sa TV nung nagpainterview na ako as ganito.
In public nakita ng mga tao na nagtuturo ako ng Zumba, curious ang mga tao dumadami sila kasi nakikita kasi nila sa akin na I am happy even if inside it2019s, you know it2019s different but, ganoonangbuhay eh, so as a performer you know laban.
Hindi hadlang ang pagiging may HIV para matigil,201d Villa said.

Villa said that one of the memorable things he said he did was to organize a Zumba dance concert for people with HIV.

201cNag speak ako in public na yes, ganito ako, ganyan so hindi lahat ng tao nakarinig ng storya ko but at least na sabi ko that is one thing on my part because it is not easy to talk to public to listen to your story kasi ibang pananaw nila e, but at least nakita nila ako na, yes I am Nash Villa with HIV, but still kicking and dancing parang ganoon.
Pinapakita ko talaga sa kanila kung gaano ako kaswerte,201d Villa said.

Teary-eyed, Villa narrated how he felt pain with the discriminatory stares and acts of people who looked past his person and only saw his disease.

201cYung feeling na pagmakita ka ng mga tao parang lalayuan ka, yung parang isang tingin lang nakakahawa na, talagang naranasan ko yan everytime pumapasok ako sa gym ang mga tao nagsisipag tabihan,201d Villa said.

But Villa said that his dream fueled him to continue in life and he worked harder.

201cMasakit hindi easy pero mas nanaig yung pangarap kasi, pangarap ko talagang maging performer maging dance teacher so talagang pi-nush ko siya so hanggang dumating ako diyan na hindi ko namamalayan having this kind of condition, mas lalong naging malakas ako and mas lalong naging proud nga ako kasi dahil dito mas maraming na inspire kung paano ako tumayo,201d Villa said.

He is a proof that exercise and right diet can enhance a body2019s resistance, which an HIV-positive needs a lot.

His doctor was even surprised how healthy looking he is despite the fact that his CD4 is so low.
As defined in AIDS.gov, 201cA CD4 count is a lab test that measures the number of CD4 T lymphocytes  in a sample of your blood.
 
In people with HIV, it is the most important laboratory indicator of how well your immune system is working and the strongest predictor of HIV progression.201d 
201cI am a fitness instructor and I sweat a lot in my work,201d he told the doctor and all that the doctor can reply was, 201cKaya pala.201d 
It was when he realized that his being fit enabled him to stay healthy despite HIV.
He said his main inspiration is his family, whom he said was the last to know about his condition.

He really said that one legacy he thinks he would pass for those who wanted to survive HIV, is to inspire them not to hide in the corners.

201cI kept on teaching, I kept on accepting interviews saan saan para at least malaman at makilala nila, maging confident sila ganito ganyan at hindi nila dapat ikatakot kasi kung wala kang acceptance or you keep on hiding, mamamatay ka lang.
Andami nang namatay sa hindi nagstick sa gamot, hindi naalagaan ang sarili,201d Villa said.

Villa, now swinging up in the air, at the prime of his career said that his door is open for opportunities saying that apart from his current job, he also considers dance workshops outside country and he also now thinking hard on job opportunities and job offers he received.
 
There2019s always something better , There2019s always something better 
DAVAO.
A child sleeps beside a hamper full of clothing while her mother attends a meeting of those families who were affected by the fire that razed some 40 houses at Purok 3-A, Isla Verde in Barangay 23-C.

Christine Joice C.
Cudis, AMONG life's most confusing phase would be when deciding to not settle for less or be contented with what you have.
 
My choice remained a question until I was assigned to cover a launching event in Madaum, Tagum City on Friday.
I thought it would be just another day but it turned to be extraordinary.
The moment I saw Maria Mercedes Arrastia-Tuason in the new training campus for the Tuason Development Foundation Incorporated , I knew that something was bound to happen.
She is a diplomat of the country and the ambassador to the Holy See in Rome.
The beneficiaries of TDFI are called incubees as they are like the eggs in an incubator waiting to be hatched under the light of the foundation.
They shared stories so inspiring that all ears were on them while they spoke.
One of them was Romulo Libed.
He said that while he was young, their mother taught them to make bagoong but he never thought of it as a way to generate money well into his retirement days.
"I was already satisfied depending on the pension I receive but I also noticed that my favorite bagoong is sold so expensive here," he explained.
Bagoongs are imported from Pangasinan and other far cities from Davao.
"Then a realization occurred to me, why should I not make them myself?"
There, I figured that he was right.
We can be contented with what we have, at the same time, we should know that we can always do more and be more.
MangRomy's Special Bagoong is making a name in the local industry today along with the products of his batchmates in the Davao Gulf Business Incubator, a facility for start-up businesses organized by the TDFI.
Not long from now, their businesses will grow even more and as they look back from where they used to be before, they would be humbled with the thought that says, "Good thing, I made the right choice."
Masbad: That tussle between Apple and the FBI, Masbad: That tussle between Apple and the FBIRoark L.
Masbad, Wacky Tech, THIS previous week, the tech world was all-eyes on the tug-of-war between the FBI and Apple because of an iPhone 5C.
What2019s the fuss about?
Well, to quote Slashgear, this 5C "was once owned by the San Bernardino shooter, and at the moment, no one can unlock it.201d Don2019t mind much about who the San Bernardino shooter is.
What we need to look closely here is the fight between Apple and the FBI .

Anyway, the FBI can2019t get into that iPhone because of a password/passcode.
And, yes, they also can2019t hack into it.
So they asked the courts to force Apple into creating a 201cbackdoor201d into the phone so they can retrieve the data they need.
Sounds simple enough.
But, unfortunately, it2019s not.
A part of the order from the judge reads below:
Apple2019s reasonable technical assistance shall accomplish the following three important functions:  it will bypass or disable the auto-erase function whether or not it has been enabled;  it will enable the FBI to submit passcodes to the SUBJECT DEVICE for testing electronically via the physical device port, Bluetooth, Wi-Fi, or other protocol available on the SUBJECT DEVICE and  it will ensure that when the FBI submits passcodes to the SUBJECT DEVICE, software running on the device will not purposefully introduce any additional delay between passcode attempts beyond what is incurred by Apple hardware.
It sounds so legalese, I know.
But from how I understand that, it basically means that Apple is being ordered to circumvent its own security and encryption protocols in all its products in order to protect our individual privacies.
If Apple gives in to this, I think this will mean that any government in any part of the world can now basically order Apple to provide it a way to access any of its products; circumventing and rendering our security measures null and void.

Tim Cook, in a letter addressed to all of Apple2019s customers, basically planted his foot down and said no to the government order:
The United States government has demanded that Apple take an unprecedented step which threatens the security of our customers.
We oppose this order, which has implications far beyond the legal case at hand.
And in a later part of the letter, it said:
We have great respect for the professionals at the FBI, and we believe their intentions are good.
Up to this point, we have done everything that is both within our power and within the law to help them.
But now the U.S.
government has asked us for something we simply do not have, and something we consider too dangerous to create.
They have asked us to build a backdoor to the iPhone.
Specifically, the FBI wants us to make a new version of the iPhone operating system, circumventing several important security features, and install it on an iPhone recovered during the investigation.
In the wrong hands, this software 2014 which does not exist today 2014 would have the potential to unlock any iPhone in someone2019s physical possession.
Emphasis by me.
I won2019t try and dive into the legal side of it all.
Suffice to say that I am, personally, scared about the possibilities of a 201cbackdoor201d into my iPhone.
There2019s a reason why these devices wipe their data automatically after 10 failed attempts of putting in a password/passcode -- protection of the owner2019s data and privacy.
That2019s a mighty good reason for me.

However this plays out, I think this will have a lasting effect in how cybersecurity, encryption and individual data privacy are implemented and protected.
At the same time, I think we should all take an interest in this because we are fast becoming a society that2019s data-dependent, device-dependent.
Facebook's Zuckerberg at crossroads in connecting the globe, Facebook's Zuckerberg at crossroads in connecting the globe
In this March 2, 2015 file photo, Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg speaks during a conference at the Mobile World Congress, the world's largest mobile phone trade show in Barcelona, Spain.

SAN FRANCISCO -- Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg likes to boast that his three-year-old effort to bring the developing world online has reached millions of people in some of the world's poorest nations.
But a central element of his Internet.org campaign was controversial even before it was shut down in a key market this month.
Indian regulators banned one of the pillars of the campaign, a service known as Free Basics, because it provided access only to certain pre-approved services 2014 including Facebook 2014 rather than the full Internet.
That leaves the social media mogul at a crossroads.
Though he has vowed not to give up, Zuckerberg hasn't said whether he'll alter his approach.
Facebook declined to make executives available for comment.
Zuckerberg could shed light on his plans when he speaks Monday at Mobile World Congress, an annual industry event in Barcelona, Spain, where he has touted Internet.org in previous years.
"Everyone in the world should have access to the Internet," Zuckerberg wrote on Facebook this month, arguing that online connections can improve lives and fuel economic development.
To achieve that goal, Zuckerberg has high-flying dreams for someday providing Internet connections through a network of drones, satellites and lasers.
But his near-term plan is simpler: Facebook works with wireless carriers in poorer nations to let people use streamlined versions of Facebook and certain other online services, without paying data charges.
While the drones may someday connect people in areas too remote for cables or cell towers, Free Basics is intended for people who live in areas with Internet service but still can't afford it.
A low-income resident of urban Manila, for example, can use Free Basics to view the Philippines' GMA News site.
"He can be informed.
He can research.
He can read the news," Ederic Eder of GMA News said.
The program varies by country, in offerings and effectiveness.
In South Africa, for instance, Facebook partnered with the third-largest wireless carrier, Cell C.
But Johannesburg resident Priscilla de Klerk said she couldn't get Free Basics to work on her phone.
"Cell C is much cheaper as far as everything else is concerned, but their free Facebook is not a reality," she said.
Last fall, Facebook announced a major expansion in Africa, where another regional carrier, Bharti Airtel, said it will offer Free Basics in 17 countries.
"They're getting a lot of traction in Africa," said Danson Njue, a Kenya-based telecom analyst with the Ovum research firm.
Tech rivals Google and Microsoft also have programs to expand Internet access, he noted, but their approaches are content neutral and involve extending networks to underserved areas.
Facebook doesn't pay wireless companies for the cost of Free Basics.
Carriers make money if new users eventually move to a paid data plan.
Facebook also says it makes no money, as it doesn't show ads, though Zuckerberg has conceded it benefits from gaining users in the long run.
While the company hasn't released detailed usage figures, Facebook says Free Basics has brought more than 19 million people online for the first time.
That counts any user who didn't have Internet access before, regardless of whether they're currently active.
On the Internet.org website, mixed in with videos about impoverished students using Free Basics to study and laborers starting small businesses, Facebook boasts more than one billion people "have access" to the service.
That's the combined population of regions where it's available, not the number of users.
Free Basics is now in 36 countries.
It was suspended last year in Egypt, on the anniversary of anti-government protests that were organized partly on Facebook.
An earlier version of Free Basics, known as Facebook Zero, was shuttered three years ago in Chile, after authorities said Internet providers couldn't offer discounts for accessing some content but not others.
Similar concerns turned India into the program's biggest battleground.
Free Basics enrolled more than one million Indians in its first year, according to Facebook's wireless partner, Reliance Communications.
But critics, including many in the country's growing tech community, complained it was a predatory scheme: If low-income users couldn't afford anything besides Free Basics, opponents said, that meant Facebook was deciding which online services the nation's poor could use.
"The government should not allow big players to monopolize the Internet," said Manu Sharma, who runs a software development company in New Delhi.
Facebook responded last fall by announcing it would open Free Basics to any app that met its technical requirements for systems with limited capacity.
Zuckerberg also changed the program's name to Free Basics, after critics complained "Internet.org" sounded like a nonprofit, when it's part of a for-profit company .
But opponents still worry that Facebook could change requirements at any time, force competitors to pay higher rates to get into the program, or even block services that run afoul of powerful politicians.
"The fact that it could decide what apps could be hosted ...
was a huge problem for me," said Basit Zaidi, a New Delhi attorney.
As Indian regulators began studying the issue, Facebook drew more resentment with a public-relations blitz that critics called heavy-handed and patronizing.
The regulators effectively banned Free Basics after concluding Internet providers shouldn't be allowed to charge different rates for certain services, because that discriminates against other content.
US regulators have endorsed the concept of "net neutrality," which says all websites and apps should be treated equally by Internet providers.
They're now studying whether "zero rating" programs, which offer some content for free, should be allowed.
Net neutrality supporters are hoping India's decision will influence other nations.
Facebook has also launched a program that helps Internet providers offer reliable Wi-Fi service in underserved areas at affordable rates and without limits on content.
The program's been limited to tests in a few countries.
The giant tech company could use its resources and clout with carriers to offer a similar wireless service, perhaps at limited speeds or volume, but without any restrictions on content, said Josh Levy of Access Now, a nonprofit that supports net neutrality.
Zuckerberg has suggested in the past that such a service would be too expensive and difficult to offer.
Some Indians, meanwhile, say their country could have benefited from Free Basics.
"Ultimately, something is better than nothing, even if that something is flawed," said Uday Singh Tomar, a software engineer in New Delhi.
"If a person is hungry and getting nothing, a free meal is good enough." 
Going big on St.
Joseph, Going big on St.
Joseph
The facade 
Robert Z.
Cortes, IF ASTONISHMENT at providential occurrences demanded a correspondence in strict proportion to its magnitude, I would definitely be compelled to make St.
Joseph big with me this year -- though happily so.

A couple of weeks ago, I sat on a talk reminding me about the Seven Sundays of St.
Joseph.
It's that rather unknown custom in the Church to prepare anyone aware and willing for the Solemnity of St.
Joseph, on March 19.
It's pretty much like what the Novena to the Immaculate Conception is to that solemnity of Our Lady and the Simbang Gabi to Christmas.
The seven Sundays are a means to honor the Seven Sorrows and Joys of St.
Joseph.
 
Just in case anyone needs to recall what these are , the following are "St.
Joseph's Sorrows and their corresponding Joys":
1.
The doubts about Mary - The angel's message of joy
2.
The pain at the lowly poverty of Jesus' birthplace - The Savior's birth 
3.
Watching the first blood Jesus' spilt for us at the Circumcision - Having the honor of naming Jesus
4.
Listening to the painful prophetic message of Simeon - Knowing the effects of Jesus' redemptive work
5.
Having to take the Holy Family into exile - The idols of Egypt fell before Jesus' feet
6.
The hard trip back from Egypt - A holy life with Jesus and Mary
7.
The loss of Jesus for three days - Finding Him after three days
Familiar, aren't they -- the events, but perhaps not the packaging? Maybe I was thinking as much as the talk was going on, and maybe trying my best to be interested.
Then quite unexpectedly, and to my surprise, it occurred to me that I should make this year's feast of St.
Joseph more special by honoring him more deliberately than I have all these years.
There are many motives for this, I thought - both past and present.

For one, I was born and raised in a parish whose patron saint is St.
Joseph; indeed one where the Philippine National Shrine of St.
Joseph is standing.
Then, I was taught at a young age that I should often go St.
Joseph as the patron saint of vocations and the interior life.
Lastly, I'm in Rome, probably the best city in the world to offer -- on a physical level -- the best possibilities for honoring any saint.
The idea that came to mind was to visit, in the next seven Sundays, a different church dedicated to the Foster Father of Jesus, or at least a side chapel built in his honor within a church.
I checked an internet site dedicated solely to churches in Rome, and saw a list of four or five of the sort.
Starting with the first on the list, I found that it is quite near my house.
This blessed fact made me think that this was going to be an easy and exciting project.
The church is called "St.
Joseph of the Woodmakers" , which means that this church was built and maintained by the ancient Roman guild of carpenters.

My excitement was soon dampened, however, when I saw things weren't in fact that easy.
The website mentioned that it is the same church as that of St.
Peter's Prison , and that it was rarely open.
The article sounded rather confusing and discouraging, such that the idea of visiting one church or chapel for the next seven Sundays lay suspended for the next seven days.
In other words, the idea nearly died at birth.
Sadly, such are many of our good intentions.
But Providence has a way of saving ideas and intentions borne out of honest desires.

On the first Sunday of St.
Joseph, I and two other friends decided to explore the Caelian Hill, one of the seven hills on which ancient Rome was built.
This excursion is part of an ongoing project to get to know the Eternal City better.
I already had a route in mind, but one of us, who has been in Rome longer, suggested another.
This particular route brought us to an area labelled "St.
Peter's Prison."When I saw the mark, my first impulse was to ask them if they knew about a church in the area dedicated to St.
Joseph that was "fused" with the church of St.
Peter's Prison.
Disappointingly, neither had any idea.
We walked down a flight of stairs with the intention of cutting short our route towards the Caelian Hill by passing through the Roman Forum.
At the end of the stairs, however, we realized that a fence separated the small piazza where we were and the Roman Forum.
This meant we had to move on to the longer route.
But imagine my surprise when, as we turned to get on our way, a charming baroque church met my eyes.
It had the label, "Chiesa di San Giuseppe dei Falegnami." This was the "Church of St.
Joseph of the Woodworkers." Providence had brought me to the place I had desired when my lack of courage didn't.

My friends and I went in, delighted at this apparent "coincidence," that gave us a chance to pay special homage to St.
Joseph on the first of his seven Sundays.
It certainly didn't make it worse that the church was designed by Giacomo della Porta, the same architect who worked on St.
Peter's Basilica, the Ges\xf9, and Sant' Andreadella Valle.
Like any baroque church, the interior was breathtaking - ceiling, sanctuary, and all.
It was a pleasure to contemplate original paintings of 17th century masters that depicted the most significant moments of St.
Joseph's life 2013 among others: his marriage to Our Lady, the search for an inn, the birth of Christ, and his holy death.
Above the area which borders the sanctuary, an Old Testament passage that often comes with images of St.
Joseph was written in gold: Ite ad Joseph .
Upon reflection, I realized that it was the message I was meant to receive from this experience.
It's a message that I've been hearing since my youth, but given the providential circumstances it has been given now, I understood that the message actually meant, "From now on, allow St.
Joseph to do more for you." 
Obviously, providential circumstances or not, St.
Joseph ought to deserve my attention - and yours, as well.
He is, after all, the Foster Father of Jesus, the Husband of the Blessed Virgin, and the Patriarch of the entire Church.
He is the second most powerful intercessor after Our Lady, a fact we should all take advantage of.
Thus, given what St.
Joseph really is, perhaps it's not a bad idea to make him figure big in our spiritual life beginning now.
Going more to Joseph with the trust and determination of one who really wants to be better can only be a promise of greater things to come.

Pinoy photographer shortlisted for Sony World Photography Awards, Pinoy photographer shortlisted for Sony World Photography Awards
'Trapo' of Lawrence Sumulong 
FILIPINO photographer Lawrence Sumulong has been shortlisted for the Professional Conceptual category of the world's biggest photography competition, the Sony World Photography Awards.
Sumulong's shortlisted series 201cTrapo201d was selected from 230,103 images from 186 countries, the highest number of entries in the awards' nine-year history.
The total number of entries received by the Sony World Photography Awards since its launch in 2007 has now surpassed one million images, reinforcing the awards' position as one of the most respected and influential photography competitions in the world.
Sumulong will now compete to win the Professional Conceptual category against photographers from around the world and the L'Iris d'Or / Photographer of the Year title and $25,000  cash prize, which will be announced at a Gala Ceremony in London on April 21.
Sumulong will also have his work shown in London as part of the 2016 Sony World Photography Awards exhibition in April and May, and be published in the 2016 edition of the Sony World Photography Awards book.
 
Lawrence Sumulong is a Filipino American photographer based in New York City and Manila.
He has received great recognition for his original photographic projects challenging the photographic medium.
His 201cTrapo201d series is an ongoing project focusing on politics in the Philippines.

201cMy series "Trapo' attempts to find an idiosyncratic way of working within the social documentary genre and express the invisible scourge of corruption and impunity in Philippine politics and society, which seemingly exists in all tiers of existence from the pencil pushers all the way to the president.
However, in deconstructing political portraits, I attempt to ask broader questions about the authenticity, rhetoric, and utility of photographic representations.
On the heels of the looming 2016 Philippine presidential elections, this exposure comes at an important and exigent time for this series,201d Sumulong said.
As to his success, he said: "I am extremely grateful to be shortlisted at this prestigious competition considering my project's obscure subject matter and approach."
The Sony World Photography Awards rewards and recognizes the world's best contemporary photography from the last year.
Attracting photographers of all abilities, the awards incorporate four competitions: Professional, Open, Youth and Student.
"We are extremely pleased with our jurors' choices this year.
Despite the increase in the number of photographers, and the amount of imagery that required judging, this year above all, others we have witnessed a wealth of powerful imagery in the traditionally strong social documentary categories as well as the art and conceptual work.
It is wonderful for the medium that it can offer such rich diversity," said Scott Gray, CEO of the World Photography Organisation and organizer of the awards.
For more information about the awards, visit www.worldphoto.org.

40th Jose Joya Awards reveals winners, 40th Jose Joya Awards reveals winners
Ferdinand Aragon with his winning entry 201cBullet to a Butterfly201d in 122 x 152 cm, paper 
WINNERS of the 40th Jose Joya Awards were named in a gathering held at the University of the Philippines  Cebu Little Gallery last February 24.
Third year Fine Arts student Ferdinand Aragon2019s 201cBullet to a Butterfly201d bested 51 other artworks.
201cIt still feels surreal,201d said Aragon, who claimed to be working on a series of pieces that depict Filipino children facing societal issues such as child pornography and child hunger.
201cThis time, my piece is about children in times of war,201d he said.
Second placer was Joshua Emmanuel Lim, with his painting 201cIncognito,201d while Ryan Seismundo came in third place with his 201cChange of Silhouette.201d
Seven finalists were also recognized during the awards night.
They were Cleane Padilla, Daniele Astrid Nazareno, Abigail Pajang, Jesus Codiniera, Clenneth Sala, Ninianne Sojor and Marvie Gasataya.
The annual painting competition is named after the late Jose Joya, National Artist for Visual Arts, who, as dean of the UP Diliman College of Fine Arts in 1976, decided to hold a contest for painting.
The contest was launched a year after the institutionalization of the UP Cebu Fine Arts Program.
UP Cebu Fine Arts professor Juanito Karl Roque Jr.
said that winning the award is a "distinction of belonging to a certain clique of students."
201cAfter a week or so, the financial incentives are gone, but the honor that is bestowed upon you is yours forever,201d said Roque.
201cThat has always been the idea of the late Jose Joya 2013 to inspire students to produce excellent works.201d
In her keynote speech, Josefa Joya-Baldovino, sister of the late national artist, said: 201cHis  desire to discover and to encourage art students to induce people to be appreciative of the fine arts made him adapt an art program.201d
She said the program would train the students to be ready 201cto meet the rigors of the time required201d for the fine arts.
Addressing the participants of the competition, Baldovino said laziness is a poor excuse not to meet deadlines for exhibition.
201cTalent to succeed in the fine arts is not sufficient.
You have to discipline yourselves to have a regular routine of hours to hone your craft,201d she said.
The artworks submitted for the awards are available in an exhibit that runs until March 4 at the UP Cebu Little Gallery.

From a newbie2019s eyes  , From a newbie2019s eyes  IT WAS my third day of duty, second day in the field.
Early that morning, I received a text message from Sir Seth about the fire incident at UCCP-Haran that burned two dormitories.

After that I received another two more follow-up messages.
This was my cue: this is urgent.
I haven2019t been to Haran before, I had to use my Google map to locate it.
 
I was scared as I approached the compound.
You can see distrust in their eyes, it2019s their first time to see me, too.
I felt like shivering seeing the two-year-old burn victim.

They told me that the fire was done on purpose by an unknown culprit.
201cWhy do people do that?201d I asked myself.
 
The next day, Kerlan Fanagel Chairperson of Pasaka Confederation of Lumad Organization in South Mindanao Region gave a statement about the incident.

201cWe do not feel safe anywhere both in the city and the place where used to live,201d he said.
 
They feel like outcasts, that they are no longer Filipinos.
I guess they feel that they are at the bottom of the triangle and the world around them are stepping on them on top.

This brings to mind Bamboo Manalac2019s version of 201cTatsulok." 
Darryl Postrano is a neophyte photojournalist of Sun.Star Davao
Necessity the father of invention   , Necessity the father of invention   
Virgilio Sangutan.

Rhealyn C.
Pojas, HE CREATED bubbles that bubbled up his innovations.
It all started when he was a dishwasher whose hands were allergic to the soap used, in that small restaurant in Daraga, Albay, where he found employment out of his desire to finish his studies amid the financial issues faced by their families.

Born in Burias Island in Masbate, Virgilio Sangutan, current president of the Davao Inventors Association, was forced to leave his little hometown in his pursuit for higher education because their locality way back then only had elementary schools.

He ventured to Daraga to continue his studies at the Bicol College High School Department but with the little income that his family earned, he had to work as a dishwasher to stay in school.

At third year high school, with hands now pocked with sores and rashes, he concocted a multipurpose cleanser for plates and house stuff to save his hands from further harm.

This became his ticket to earn degrees in Bachelor of Science in Commerce major in Banking and finance at the Divine Word College of Legaspi and BS in Economics at the Philippine Business School of Business Administration as he eventually quit working as a dishwasher at the restaurant and instead sold his multipurpose cleanser to restaurant owners and other households.

After he graduated in College, he stopped his production and started working in a bank in Manila but fate has its way of turning things to its original plan and in 1985, the bank closed down forcing Sangutanto go to Davao City to join his family.

He returned to making and selling his cleansers to restaurants and cinemas in the city.
Since then, Sangutan had been involved in innovative projects after the Department of Science and Technology  accredited him as a Filipino inventor.

His products skyrocketed from just merely making a dish washing liquid to making herbal products, coffee, shampoo, soap, herbal liniment oil, organic fertilizers and others.

Their team became the first herbal manufacturer in the Philippines where the Bureau of Food and Drugs granted them a license in 1994 and they eventually built a laboratory in Carmen, Davao City.

This industry blossomed and brought recognition to herbal and food supplement not only in the country but as well as in other countries, according to Sangutan.

With all the innovations he was able to make with his team, Sangutan said that his constant source of information to create inventions sparked from the drive to help the country achieve development.

201cOur hearts as Filipino inventors are set on helping our countries achieve development,201d Sangutan said in an interview.

201cAs inventors, it is always our job to look for problems in the society so that out of these we can give solutions for everyone,201d Sangutan said adding that it is always their belief as inventors that necessity is the mother of all inventions.

His constant reminder to himself is to not entertain negatives as hindrances as these should be dealt with to give more rooms to innovations and improvements.
 
201cEntertain the negative comments you received as a positive,201d he encouraged the young people who dreamed of becoming inventors.
 
Sangutan is the current president of the Philippine Traditional and Alternative Herbal and Cosmetics Association in Mindanao in 2015, Mindanao Inventors Federation, and also a member of the screening committee of the DOST.
Turning Japanese in the boondocks  , Turning Japanese in the boondocks  
BAGUIO.
Sakura Terrace 168 Military Cut-off.

Roderick Osis, SAKURA Terrace gives diners a quaint taste of the real Japan.
Owned and managed by Daisuke Hagiwara, Sakura is one of the few authentic Japanese restaurants in the Summer Capital offering dishes which are both palatable and price friendly.

Aside from authentic recipes the resto also boasts of a Japanese chef trained by Hagiwara himself, which leaves every diner craving for more.
Established June last year, Sakura has already gained followers of food lovers not only from the city but also Japanese nationals but also locals which have come to love the cuisine, 201cSince we opened our establishment last year, we are slowly picking up and we hope to promote not only the food but Japanese culture itself,201d said Hagiwara.

The Hagiwara family manages and owns several restaurants in Japan before deciding to bring their cuisine in the City.

The decision to set up a business in the City at the time when Hagiwara was still an English student who had a hard time looking for authentic Japanese restaurants.
Hagiwara felt the need to put up his own food establishment in 2013, Yamashita Ramen House opened which became an instant hit, a few years later, Hagiwara knew it was time to expand and that saw the birth of Sakura in 2015.

Open from 11 a.m.
to 11 p.m.
on Fridays to Sundays and 11 am to 9 pm from Monday to Thursday, Sakura authentic tonkotsu and tantanmen ramen, teishoku, bento boxes and a vast selection of sushi that goes with their selection of Japanese wine, sake, beer and korean soju.
Hagiwara pegged a price range of P210 to P270, for the selection of teishoku which will leave you wanting for more.

The best selling sushi ranges from P150 to P170, and boasts to be the most authentic because of its strict use of Japanese rice, 201cCompared to other Japanese restaurant, we boast of authentic Japanese ingredients that we import from Japan, especially our rice,201d said Hagiwara.

Another best seller of the house is the bento box priced at P320 only containing ebi tempura, Japanese rice, either sashimi or gyoza and miso soup.
Japanese food lovers can also enjoy the taste of Sakura Terrace right at the warmth of their house with their home delivery service by calling or texting 780-8788 or 585-2228 with delivery fee of P150.
Buffet at the Heritage , Buffet at the Heritage 
BAGUIO.
Heritage Mansion Buffet at Kisad Road, thru Abanao Ext., corner G.
del Pilar Street.

Maria Elena Catajan, BAGUIO CITY -- Foodies will have a filled day.

The iconic Heritage Mansion offers a hefty buffet aimed to please the pallets with eights stations to choose from and a changing menu will surely satisfy appetites.

The restaurant and hotel is managed by Susan Sanidad and owned by Donna Padilla Taguiba opening just time when the buffet craze hit the City, priced at a low P398, open from lunch starting 11 p.m.
to 2 p.m.
and dinner at 7 p.m.
to 9 p.m.
daily.

The Heritage Buffet is now known for its Eat All You Can Lechon Belly and Pinapaitang Kambing and a menu which changes almost weekly depending on the wants and needs of patrons.

Executive chef JR Ramos says when the staff notices a certain dish is not moving fast enough from the line up, it is quickly changed the following day to something they think will be more palatable the mixed crowd of locals, foreigners and tourists.
The Heritage Buffet has a Carving station, Italian, Grill, Asian, Main, Desserts, Japanese and a juice bar complete the eight stations spread out in the 250 capacity of the restaurant.

Ramos says, by far, they are the lone restaurant which offers the wide variety of stations in the city, with locals being carnivorous, the carvings station has become an instant hit.

Sanidad said fresh ingredients come from suppliers in the city up to the entire North handpicked by the management to assure quality and the perfect dining experience.

The carving and Japanese stations are so far the best sellers of the newly opened buffet restaurant which carry lechon belly, roasted chicken, beef and pork ribs.

Ramos said the dishes for all stations change every two days, depending on the need and the wants of diners.

Ramos said a staple in the main station is the pinapaitan kambing, a dish loved by northern folk and has stayed on since the opening last month.
The main station plays on the pallets of food lovers who want to have a restaurant experience with a homey feel 201cParang nasa bahay ka lang,201d with dishes like caldereta, kare kare, sisig and pata tim.

Ramos said the inclusion of Cordilleran food into the menu will come after the kitchen team composed of souchefs and assistants will collaborate.

The Japanese station has an assortment of Maki rolls and tempura which has proved to be a favourite among locals.

The Italian station has pasta with three sauces, creamy carbonara, pesto and marinara sauces with homemade pizza while the dessert station has an assortment of cakes, crepes and chocolaty delights to come after meal treats.

Appetizers include bruschetta, kimchi, spicy dilis, sweetened potatoes, fish fillet, and croquettes while the grill section is filled with squid, salmon head, chicken insal and shells to grill and be served at your table.

Ramos said the weekday crowd has been a consistent full house since opening and hopes to sustain the enthusiasm of foodies in the City.
The Heritage Buffet is the latest addition to the growing food scene in the City which is fast becoming a food lovers2019 paradise.
Dating by the Camp Camping Date , Dating by the Camp Camping Date 
BAGUIO.
Camping Date at #16 Legarda Road, Baguio City.

Jessa Mardy Polonio, RESTAURANT camping has arrived in the Mountain City.

Camping in an urbanized City may be odd for some but for the adventurous, this new destination offers an ambiance for those dreaming for a date in the woods.
Owned and operated by Korean Nationals, Hoya and Melba Mun, who patterned the idea to a training camp, have created a following for those looking for off-the-beaten-path ambiance and authentic Korean food.

The entrance of the restaurant offers a tent pitched to the floor with a table within, four more tents are pitched to the floor with varying sizes to accommodate couples or groups, giving you the outdoor feel while inside the confines of the room.

Scattered around are tables with foldable chairs available for those who wish to stretch their legs while dining, the restaurant is a magnet for couples, friends, and families seeking to try a different dining experience.

Opening in 2013 the restaurant has found a new and wider home in Legarda Road, which offers a more spacious setting for the City2019s first tent resto.

Vida Venus Vista, of Camping Date shared to Sun*Star Baguio that Hoya specializes in pizza and is one of their specialties as well as chicken recipes with authentic Korean spices.
The tent resto offers eight varieties of pizza from cheese, Hawaiian, potato bacon, pepperoni, spicy chicken, bulgogi or combination.
The best-seller, dubbed as the sweet potato is topped with mushroom, ground beef, green bell pepper, onions and spices imported all the way from Korea, offering mouth-watering flavours with its thin crust cooked to perfection.

Camping Date prices ranges from P210 for the small size depending on the pizza flavour good enough for two; P380 and up for medium sized pies which can feed four; P580 and up for the large sized  enough to feed a group of six hungry friends while the family sizes pizza ranges from P850 to P950 good for eight persons.
For the chicken menu, half orders are good for two to three persons.
Shower Cream .
Select pieces of boneless fried chicken arranged in a stainless round plate and sprinkled with a mixture of Korean spices in creamy white sauce.
Red Kiss .
The best seller is like your favourite buttered chicken but the coating filled with sweet honeyed Korean spices served in a stainless pan-like plate.
Snowing Cheese .
Also a must try is the snowing cheese chicken.
Their signature fried chicken rolled in powder of spices, tasting like our Filipino favourite, Clover Chips.

They also have baked chicken with salad for the weight-conscious; honey-butter chicken, garlic, soy, all having special Korean spices and sauces, setting its falvours apart from the usual chain of restaurants.

They also serve Korean ice cream, ramyun, gyoza mandu, odeng tang and for a light snack.
Vista said 201cEverything in the menu is original recipes from the owner,201d in house restaurant chefs were also personally trained by Hoya to achieve the perfect balance of flavours.

The restaurant is manned by an all Filipino team of 15 employees; operating hours are from 12 noon to 1am.

Bringing back coffee talk , Bringing back coffee talk 
BAGUIO.
Gossip Cafe 76 Upper General Luna Road near Laubach Road.

Maria Elena Catajan, UMOUR has it, there is a new cafe in town.
Gossip Cafe silently opened in 2014 and has created a quiet following since.

Owned and operated by Michael William Jacob and King George Bueno, the quaint coffee shop aims to give an alternative space for those who want to sip and talk over coffee.

Before the start of the take - over of giant coffee franchises, do you remember the days when a cup of coffee and conversation with a good friend would be enough to make you feel better?
Amid the backdrop of an old house, DIY interiors and cozy corners where hushed conversations can ensue, Gossip Caf\xe9 has brought back the relaxing feel of a shared cup of coffee.

Gossip will take you away from the franchise craze, they offer no stickers to get a planner, there is no flashy logo to brandish your brew but only a quiet, unassuming place where you can sit, think and talk.

Jacob and Bueno both poured their heart and soul into decorating the shop with personal favorites they have incorporated into the design, giving it an appeal which is both warm and comfortable.

Starting with only five tables, the cafe can now accommodate groups and small meetings, slowly adding on the interiors over the years and allowing friends to help out in the design.

The duo used colors not usually meant for establishments veering away from earth tones and choosing hues of red, orange and yellow which calms all those who go in for a cup of their favorite brew.

A menu both affordable and creative with meals and drink which can be either taken in the garden or an inner room designed Japanese style with cushions and lower tables, Gossip Cafe will give you your own corner to love to lounge into.

Coffee prices will put to shame the more popular shops and each brew is laden with Latte Art which will delight you when you order your caffeine of choice.
Jacob said the coffee menu was completed when a barista friend offered to help out in the opening of the shop, making choices easy, no frills and enjoyable.

The coffee shop is now one of the 201cget together201d places of friends for weekday meet ups or weekend a pit stop.

Gossip Cafe is open from 9 am to 11 pm Mondays through Saturdays while on Sunday the Cafe is open from 1 pm to 11 pm.
Tatak World: A food trip at the Lake , Tatak World: A food trip at the Lake 
Photo by Milo Brioso.
Danica Guieb, TOURISTS not just from the country but all over the world flock Baguio City during Panagbenga Festival.

At the quintessential Burnham Park2019s Lake Drive, over 50 stalls line the road which will give you a dining experience with food stalls from all over the world.

Flower festival organizers have made sure stalls are more accessible which allows people to promenade and enjoy the beauty of the American inspired park in the midst of the February festivities.

Almost 23% of stalls at the park is dedicated to food with the rest laden with dry goods, shoes, clothes, knick knacks, souvenirs and memorabilia aside from Cordilleran products like native cakes, cookies, bread, strawberry and ube jam, lengua de gato, chocolate flakes and snow balls.
For the foodies out there, a trip along Lake Drive can fulfill your big appetite with an array of dishes you can try with about P100 to P200.

The scent of food invites you as soon as you reach Lake Drive, enticing you to trod on and explore the expanse of stalls and food carts.
The classic Ilocos Empanada 
A crispy crust with the signature filling is the secret to a yummy empanada, at Lake Drive, empanadas have asado, ham and cheese, tuna, and chicken.
In Vigan town, stuffing is composed of cabbage mixed with egg whites, Vigan longganisa, and egg yolk while Batac2019s version is filled with papaya, mongo and their own longanisa mix with a whole egg.
It is said, the empanada recipe was brought by Spaniards but in the towns of Ilocos different versions of the snack have evolved.

The Piaya and Chicharon
The Piaya originated from Negros Occidental, a muscovado-filled unleavened flatbread evolving in strawberry, ube and buko pandan flavours here, sold at P40 to 60 each pack, it will already make you feel like you are in the province.
Bulacan, known for crispy, salty and savoury Chicharon is found in several stalls, perfect for pulutan and merienda with or without dipping it in vinegar.
Ninja pancakes
You will not miss their store with their bright red corner and ninja uniformed cooks.
Pancakes are supposed to be creamy, fluffy and sweet if topped with maple syrup but the Ninja pancake is different, it looks like a small cake with a sweet tangy flavour.

It is a pancake with a twist of the Pinoy bibingka and Tsinoy siopao, filled with fried egg and then topped with red eggs like your Chinese siopao, priced at P40 a piece, it is now one of the best sellers among the stalls.

The American style burger
This stall is home to delicious barbeques, steaks, and of course burgers, grilling a hot meal of P100-150 with its patties grilled to perfection.

French Crepe and Belgian Waffles
Want to dine a la Paris with a price of P65 to 75, visit the French Crepe stall, a small stand which offers French crepes in chocolate, blueberry cream cheese and strawberry.

In another stall, there is Belgian Waffles.
 
Belgian waffles unlike American-style waffles have deeper pockets which can hold more syrup and the texture is also lighter and crispier, sold in different flavours; from strawberries to blueberries and priced from 65-150.
If you are one of the millions joining the flower festival, don't forget to visit food stalls along Lake Drive and dine with the world.
Flower power in Bahong , Flower power in Bahong 
BAGUIO.
Panagbenga Festival is considered by its organizers to have ushered the introduction of tourist destinations outside Baguio City like the Rose Capital in Bahong, La Trinidad.
The barangay is now offering flower farm tours which is frequently visited by urban students.
Even the Department of Tourism is now banking on the development of agri-tourism as a sustainable approach to both sectors of toursim and agriculture.

Jessa Mardy Polonio, BENGUET -- The annual celebration of Baguio City2019s Panagbenga Festival has catapulted this town into a Flower Capital.

Aside from strawberries, the municipality of La Trinidad is also known for its flower growing villages where eco-farm tourism is being developed as a complimentary destination outside Baguio.

The towns of La Trinidad, Atok, Tublay, Kapangan, Kibungan and Buguias have been producing cut flowers sold in several local markets around the country.

Barangay Bahong in La Trinidad is dubbed as the famous flower growing community declared as the Rose Capital of the Philippines in 1998 by then Department of Agriculture Secretary William Dar.
About half of the total 410 hectares of land in Bahong are intended for agricultural use particularly for cut flower production with roses not the only flower produced because farmers have ventured into the production of chrysanthemums and anthuriums.

Bahong is considered as the center of the local cut-flower industry in this part of Benguet with cut-flower-producing barangays of this town, such as Ambiong and Alno.
A steady supply of flowers comes from Valley cut flower farmers especially during the flower festival season where the demand increases.
The Municipal Agriculture office revealed strawberries and cut flowers are still remain top agricultural products.
Growers supply flowers in Metro Manila, Ilocos Region, and Bicol Region.
The flower production of the province reached 24, 862, 467 MT for the year of 2011.
La Trinidad has the highest contribution with 18, 876, 650 MT of cut flower production.
Chrysanthemums pegged as the highest production among the flowers with 15, 833, 455 MT.
Fiji flowers are like chrysanthemum because of its resemblance but differ in their varieties of colors.
For 2012, 31, 757, 481 MT of flowers were produced by the province with chrysanthemum still having the highest production 13, 273, 223 MT and La Trinidad having the highest among the municipalities with 17, 221, 990 MT of flowers.
Cut flower farmers here sell their products at the Dimasalang area in Manila.
Benguet supplies heavily to these open markets, aside from highland vegetables.
Farm tourism
Usual tourism destinations in urban cities may no longer attract curiosity from adventure seekers thus the Department of Tourism in the Cordillera is now bent on developing farm destinations 2013 where visitors may experience nature and be educated on the realm of agriculture.
But this is easier said than done.
Willy Padio, manager of the Benguet Fresh Multipurpose Cooperative, said his group has been planning to develop a cluster of flower plantations for farm tourism but cannot locate an area suitable for the purpose since their members are scattered too.
Padio said cooperative members are in Alno, Alapang, Shilan and even in Sto.
Tomas, Baguio City as well as in Tublay and Kapangan, members have flower farms in Bahong otherwise lack funding to develop cement foot paths that would link their farms to the main road.

Unlike roses which continuously blooms, chrysanthemums are being harvested every four months, Padio said the cycle of flower propagation renders some months with no blooms 201cWe need to study how to make our farms continuously blooming if we will open these to tourist because we don2019t like to disappoint visitors also.201d 
The cooperative has a stall at the Dangwa station in Manila where their flower produce from the members are sold to florists.
With the growing number of tourists visiting the flower plantations barangay officials crafted an Ordinance institutionalizing rules and regulations for the management of tourist attractions in Bahong.
Tourists are now required to pay an environment fee of P20 per head at the Barangay Tourism Office.
The rate for students and senior citizens is P15 per individual.
For foreign tourists, admission fee is P50 per person.
An additional tour guide fee of P200 for local tourists with a 10-member group will also be imposed.
The rate for foreign tour guide fee per group of 10 persons is P300.
Aside from the regulatory fees, tourists who wish to pick flowers from the private farms will have to pay fees at the discretion of the owner of the farm.
The fees collected will be used to fund barangay programs on clean and green aside from tourism related activities.
In the recent years, visitors have flocked to Bahong to marvel the beauty of the local blooms with residents opening the plantations to visitors.
The thrill of flower picking and the magnificent view from the deck excites everyone who visits the farms.
 
Barangay Kagawad Jantor Morales said this week 300 visitors are scheduled to visit the flower farms.
In cases where visitors travel by bus, the local jeepney association has to ferry the visitors either from Km.6 in front of the Provincial Capitol or from Baguio City since the existing barangay road cannot accommodate large vehicles such as busses, 201cOf course ferrying the visitors is additional income for the jeepney drivers.201d 
Today as an emerging tourism destination, a system is sought to be set in place both for residents and visitors alike aimed to make barangay Bahong into a flower destination for all.
Baste Duterte, Robin Padilla: The other tandem  , Baste Duterte, Robin Padilla: The other tandem  
 Baste Duterte and Robin Padilla in Hong Kong.
HONG KONG -- They crossed paths a long time ago, one did not even remember.
The other took it to the heart.
When they shook hands for the first time, the two were courteous and reverent to each other.
One was reluctant he may not measure up to the other.
  
The other has an incident in the past he would rather forget but would later man up and tell what it was all about.
A few seconds later, they hit the high note together.

Actor Robin Padilla and Sebastian 2018Baste2019 Duterte arrived here hours apart Saturday but only saw each other the following day inside a posh hotel room in the central business district of Kowloon in Hong Kong.
  
The 2016 May elections has fated them to again cross paths but this time for a man they both admire and want to become the president of the Philippines 2013 Rodrigo Duterte, the feisty Davao City mayor.
 
Utol 201cUtol nalang tawag ko sa 2018yo ,201d Robin told Baste as he gently tapped the lap of the mayor2019s youngest son who nodded in approval.

The action star offered coffee and motioned his manager to prepare one.
But Baste politely refused and instead asked for water.
201cHindi po ako nagkakape, ma2019am ,201d he told Robin2019s aide.
 
He nevertheless accepted and drank the tea that was given him.
Their conversation touched on the personal.
Robin resented how he was blacklisted by the US government and barred from entering the "coalition of the willing" countries after he converted to Islam.
201cKawawa naman pati anak ko.
Pati siya damay kasi kapangalan ko Robinhood Padilla ,201d he said.

Robin joked he will have the name of his child changed, instead.
His son was with wife Marielle, a US citizen, when barred from boarding the plane bound for the US.

201cPero di natin masisi ang US kasi praning sila ,201d Robin could only reason out.
  
Nervous Baste2019s demeanor during the whole duration of his meeting with Robin was that of a serious albeit nervous and a rebellious young man.

Very short with his reply.Very straightforward.

He reminded Robin over an incident at the peak of Mt.
Apo in Davao City where the actor refused to pose for a picture with a group of young men many years ago.
 
Among those young men who stripped themselves naked above the waist despite the biting cold was Baste.

Baste resented the snob.
But it was all gone the moment he and Robin shook hands.

Robin apologized for the incident that did not cross his mind.
The two men that exchange pleasantries were once angry young men.

Mayor Duterte once reportedly told his bodyguard that he finds the then young Baste, not even in his teens, to be very rebellious.

With tattoos over his neck and arms and a piercing on his lower right lip, you will mistake Baste as a rock star, leather jacket and all.

Baste is the least known among the three children of Mayor Duterte by his estranged wife Elizabeth.
.

Baste, at 28, is the most apolitical among the Duterte siblings and runs his own business 2013 a junk shop.

He goes around without bodyguard and his constant companion is Lawyer Alexis Lumbatan.

His first election campaign foray was in Tagbilaran City, Bohol but he is now finding himself everywhere.
  
Where his father cannot go, he usually pitches in if the crowd is within his age bracket.

And he is beginning to show his smile and is liking his role.
 
Rock stars With his moustache, goatee and toupee making him look more like the young Johnny Depp, Robin2019s trench coat provided stark contrast to Baste2019s black leather jacket by the time they arrived at the makeshift stage along Chater Road where some 15,000 OFWs were waiting for them.

The very few Filipino males, most of them entertainers, provided the muscle as they formed human chain to prevent the crowd from mobbing the vehicle when it approached the holding area at the back of the stage.

But the rest of the marshals were women, some wearing their hijabs.
 
As soon as Robin emerged from the top window of the van, the Filipino 2013 men and women and LBGTs 2013 began training their mobile phones 2013 iPhones and Androids 2013 and snapped the best shots they could take of and with their idols.
Then Robin pulled Baste from the inside of the car and the two raised their hands to salute the 2018tunay na bayani2019 of the Philippines.

Outgoing, sometimes brass, Robin the self-confessed former drug user told the crowd Duterte is his new idol, after the late Fernando Poe Jr.

For an actor who once basked at being the 2018The Idol2019 of action genre of Philippine cinema, calling the colorful Davao City mayor his idol meant so much for Robin.

After waving and shaking hands with the enthusiastic and screaming fans, Robin gave way to Baste who spoke first.

The crowd did not expect Baste to be as good looking even though ruggedly dressed.
 
But then, his mother Elizabeth Zimmerman is a Filipina-German.

Later, Baste admitted he was nervous before he spoke his first word and the adrenalin rush continued long after he and Robin left the stage.

Baste did a good account of himself, though, prompting comments from the sidelines that he could very well follow the footsteps of his father.

The loudest shrieks, of course, went to Robin who has not lost every bit of his celebrity pull.

He cajoled, he ranted, he appealed, he explained and he even sang to woe the votes of the more than 180,000 OFWs working in the Chinese autonomous territory.
  
All these, he said with full conviction, for free.
He said, he paid for his own plane ticket, hotel room and meals.
All for the love of country and Duterte.
When Robin was done, he motioned to Baste to again take the center stage.
This time, Baste was already confident in asking his countrymen to make a difference and vote for his father.
And like his father, he ended by taking a bow.
 
Then Baste and Robin put each other2019s arms around each other2019s shoulder as they exited the stage.
A new friendship is born.
  
The other tandem of the 2016 election is rising.
Baste and Robin.
Art for Everyone, Art for EveryoneStella A.
Estremera, AROUND 30 artists made up of three art groups and individuals exhibiting 139 paintings and sculptures.
That2019s the SM Lanang Premier Atrium since yesterday until today as SM celebrates the Art Month of February with the group exhibit 201cArt for Everyone201d.
With Tourism Regional Director Roberto Alabado cutting the ribbon, the groups of artists were all excited about the occasion.
Curator Rodney Jao, himself an artist but who opted not to display any for this weekend as he takes on the role of organizer, said there is a large pool of visual artists in Davao that people should appreciate and bringing them over to a mall will make visual art more accessible to the regular mallgoers.
201cOur artists are brilliant and may nakikitang hope sa mga bago.
Maraming aspiring who have great promise,201d he said, 201cand the good thing is that the senior artists are transferring their skills and experiences to the new one kaya everytime nagpapatawag ako for an exhibit, madali lang mag-gather.201d
Among the artists who joined are: Banjo Satorre, Darryl Descallar, Brnado Cedeno, Dinky Munda, Jong Tangiday, Laurence Tulio, Jeff Bangot, Dominador Pamisa Jr., Machael Bauzon, Romeo Dumuk III, Arnil Navarro, Kevin Becira, Dave Ibao, Lauren Velez, Eloisa Sanson, Anoy Catague, Rene Boy Chona, Michael Pueblas, Jun Roy Dignadice, Marvin Traya, Rey Mark Gipulao, Miriam Ulay, Cindy Ignacio, Mark Gil Ortega, Romar Adriano Olasiman, Perry Liquigan, Rey Sugarol, Jomar Bacus, Rojandela Cruz, Alyssa Kadir, Disney Panganoron, Jun Roy Dignadice, Eddieson Gonzaga, Rhea Mariz Arander, Giorgio Piscua, and Kyle Toribio.
In his welcome speech, SM Lanang2019s Russel Alaba said, that the 201cArt for Everyone201d is held simultaneously in six malls for the first time.
Aside from Lanang, these are in SM City North Edsa, SM Megamall, SM Aura Premier, SM Southmall, and SM City Cebu.
201cWith 2018Art for Everyone2019, our aim is to be the conduit that connects our local artists to a bigger audience, starting with our regular mall goers,201d Alaba said.
For his part, Tourism Regional Director Robert Alabado welcomes the mainstreaming of visual arts as this bodes well for a city2019s arts and culture scene and the appreciation by its people.
201cGetting these artworks down to an open space like a mall provides the masses access on the works of arts of Dabawenyos,201d he said.
201cDati-rati kasi, di mo makikita ang mga pieces na yan dahil either nakatago sa gallery or sa mga bahay-bahay nila.201d
Honing skills on election reporting , Honing skills on election reporting 
DAVAO.
Ariel Sebellino, Philippine Press Institute Executive Director, took a group shot with the participants of the seminar-workshop during the last day of the event.

Rhealyn C.
Pojas, EVEN watchdogs have to watch themselves.
Sometimes the problem lies not only on whether the watchdogs are barking up the right tree but also on whether they are barking the right things.

This is necessary to ensure one2019s safety, considering the situation in the Philippine where journalists as targets of politics, and to make certain that one is echoing out the right voices.
Last February 24 to 26 was an opportunity for both enthusiastic puppies and 201cold-jaded dogs 201d in the media industry to learn new ways in handling their media coverage especially now that the election period is coming.
More than 20 journalists from Davao City, Cagayan De Oro City, Bukidnon, General Santos City, and other parts of Mindanao participated in a seminar-workshop dubbed as 201cOpinion Polls and Elections: Making Media Coverage Count201d initiated by the Philippine Press Institute  with the support of Nickel Asia Corporation in collaboration of the Marketing and Opinion Research Society  of the Philippines Inc.
The seminar-workshop was held at the VIP Hotel in Cagayan De Oro City.

With the election period starting to heat up, the seminar-workshop was just in time to give media practitioners a fresh perspective on how they should treat their election coverage.
What are the right things to bark and who are the people the media practitioners must give voice to?
Tess Bacalla, the PPI Training director for the seminar-workshop, reminded both young and veteran journalists to give voice to the voiceless and make an engaging and relevant story from the local that will make sense in the national scope.
Her presentation will leave one to think, 201cWhy am I writing this story? Am I making an impact?201d
Speaking about the topic on Measuring Up: Digging Out Unreported and Underreported stories, Bacalla stressed that journalists must not only report what2019s been said by who or what is seen happening but must dig deeper into the stories they are pursuing and see what2019s been missed or left out.
With politicos in this season making appearances and releasing statements hither and thither that are now dominating the news, Bacalla said reporters must opt to not only report what2019s been said but also what is not said.
Reporting election related stories do not have to be necessarily done closely with the candidates running for a position but one can also make election-related stories even by not going out to the field where the politicos are setting foot, Bacalla said.
Also with the election surveys being released and reported by different news agencies, reporters are reminded through the presentation of Nicco de Jesus of Mores titled 201cBehind the Numbers: Understanding Surveys201d that journalists must report election surveys responsibly since this could either be used for bad things, can be unused that will contribute to ignorance, and might be disused, which will result into confusion.

201cSurveys thrive in societies that value representing people2019s voices,201d De Jesus said, explaining that both the researcher and reporters writing survey results stories are accountable.
201cSurveys badly told will make consumers not trust the surveys anymore,201d De Jesus said.
De Jesus also explained that if surveys are properly conducted and disseminated, it will provide the public with a tool to measure opinions and attitudes in order to allow their voices to be heard.
The workshop did not only give journalists attack weapons to use in reporting election stories but also defense tools that they can use to protect themselves from possible harm that they might encounter in pursuing election-related stories.
Through the presentation of Associate Professor Rachel Khan of the Journalism Department of the University of the Philippines in Diliman, journalists were once again refreshed on the ethics in election reporting.
Aside from reminding the participants that the libel law can be used abusively to threaten media practitioners, she also impressed upon the participants to ask themselves whether they are the right person to write a certain story related to the election and said that stories should be issue-based and not personality based.
201cGive space to all candidates and put greater diversity of news sources,201d these are just some of what Khan had put emphasis during her presentation.
Participants were also given the chance to apply what they have learned during the seminar through the group write-shop where each were given the chance to voice out their opinions and do brainstorming on stories to pursue that is relevant to the election.
The seminar-workshop provided an interactive exchange of ideas and thoughts from both the participants and speakers, which was a good venue to bridge the gap between the reporters of all ages.
201cEven an old-jaded dog can learn new tricks,201d a reporter from Manila Times said upon sharing what she learned during the seminar.
It was indeed the time where both the innocent puppies and jaded dogs in the field of journalism learned new tricks alike.
Masbad: 5G: Is it coming?, Masbad: 5G: Is it coming?Roark L.
Masbad, Wacky Tech, IN THE recent Mobile World Congress, 5G was talk of the town.
Everyone2019s got their panties up in a bunch about 5G.
What is it exactly?
Well, according to an article at Engadget, it2019s more of a concept for now.
It2019s getting there but it will be quite a while before it2019s actually implemented and rolled out for real world use.
"Broadly, it describes the next generation of wireless networks that will reach speeds at least ten times faster than LTE, with near instant latency in some cases."
I would touch up on the dismal situation of our country2019s mobile networks but I2019d be digressing already.
Let2019s just talk about 5G.

This is exciting news if you ask me.
Think about it.
The promise of near instant latency for connections.
Ultra fast connections as well.
The world as we know it becomes as connected as ever.
To quote an article from Business Insider:
5G will put 4G to shame in almost every conceivable way.
For starters.
it will be approximately 100 times faster than the fastest current 4G LTE network standard, according to Chinese mobile titan Huawei.
5G will also have more than 1,000 times the data capacity of 4G.
To put that in perspective, Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg said at MWC that a 5G user could download a two-hour film in one second.
With that kind of bandwidth and speed, it2019s easy to imagine the plethora of innovations and technological breakthroughs that can be attained in the mobile technology industry and beyond.
I2019ve read articles already about good things that can come out of this 5G technology.
CNET published one article.

How about a 100Gbps wireless internet speed? Interested? According to an article by the International Business Times, researchers from Japan have already developed it.
Bazinga! 
Sadly though, there aren2019t any 5G standards yet that have been published.
So things can still change.
Hopefully, the changes will be for the better.
Bottomline, and whatever these standards will be, it will most likely be a great step forward towards better mobile connectivity.
Overcoming stigma remains difficult for the mentally ill , Overcoming stigma remains difficult for the mentally ill 
CAGAYAN DE ORO.
A resident walks past isolation rooms for newly-rescued, mentally-challenged residents of the Residential Care for Elderlys and Differently-Abled Center, a city-run facility.

Pamela Jay F.
Orias, FOR the mentally-challenged and their families, there is yet another heavy cross to bear aside from mental illness, overcoming stigma.
Stella Ferrarez of the Cagayan de Oro City Social Welfare and Development  said the stigma associated with mental illness makes it doubly difficult for patients to seek treatment, or for families to accept and support a mentally-challenged family member.
"We are really fighting against it , this is actually the reason why mentally-challenged or even their families find it difficult to come out and be treated, kay ika-ulaw man sila," Ferrarez said.
Despite decades of advancement in medical science, Ferrarez said mental illness is still largely perceived as a sign of weakness and thus, a source of shame for both the individual and his or her family.

Ferrarez said the mentally challenged often delay seeking psychiatric help and deprived of crucial social support from family members and friends.
"I think families just need to accept the fact na siguro, it runs in their blood.
Kinsa may gusto magka-sakit, wala man diba," she said.
She said warmth, understanding, affection, and care are what the mentally challenged need.

With proper treatment, Ferrarez said the mentally challenged have a good chance of eventually being reintegrated to the community.
Social worker Katherine Callanta, however, said the perennial lack of funds for medicines make administering proper treatment for the mentally challenged difficult.
Callanta, head of the Residential Care for Elderlys and Differently-Abled Center, said the center does not have enough funds for medicines resulting to interrupted treatment for many of its mentally challenged residents.
"Kung dili maka-take ug tambal ang patient for one whole week, naa gyud  tendency manakit siya with fellow patients, mag-wild, mang-lakag,201d Callanta said.

Medicines are also expensive, Callanta said.
A mentally challenged individual undergoing treatment often needs to take a cocktail of medicines daily for a period ranging from six months to three years.

Psychiatric drugs range anywhere from P10 to P300 per tablet, terribly expensive for low income patients or patients2019 families.
A patient who has relapsed may have to take maintenance medicines for longer periods and have to be taken to Davao City2019s Southern Philippines Medical Center, the nearest mental facility, Callanta said.

"Mao man gayud ni ang problema bisan mag-consult lang unta maglisud ta because we do not lack only medicines, we also lack psychiatrists here," Callanta said.
According to Ferrarez, there are only four private psychiatrists in the city.

"We need a government psychiatrist, mao gayud na ang wala ta dinhi sa Cagayan de Oro, hopefully kung naa nata'y government-owned mental hospital, mabutangan na pud ta diri ug psychiatrist," Callanta said.
Access to medication remains a major reason for non-compliance to treatment, a fact long emphasized by the According to Philippine Mental Health Association Cagayan de Oro Chapter.
The Committee of German Doctors, which runs a hospital in the city, provides limited medications to selected indigent clients who qualify based on their screening procedures.

But Ferrarez said the mentally challenged come from all income groups and  treatment can be prohibitive even for middle income families.
Ferrarez said another challenge for the CSWD is the absence of current data tracking the number of mentally challenged in the city.
A Department of Health in Northern Mindanao report quoted by the PMHA-CDO shows that there are 350 mentally-ill patients in the province.
"This is something that we are still working on gayud, since importante ma-identify nato kung pila na sila and from there mahibal-an nato unsa gyud ang need as a whole," Ferrarez said.
In the meantime, Ferrarez said the CSWD, together with mental health advocates, has launched an initiative to educate people at the barangay level to and making them understand about the illness and to combat age-old stigma linked with mental illness.
"Persons with mental-illness can be productive if given proper treatment," Ferrarez said.

Hyper about chocolates   , Hyper about chocolates   
Iman Mary Rose Suguitan 
Rhona Goc-ong-Villariasa, A CERTIFIED chocolate-lover, Iman Mary Rose Suguitan or Iman Suguitan dreams of creating an international chocolate brand.

A plan she wants to pursue with her sister Luchie and their 67-year old mother.
 
"My sister Luchie enrolled in EcoleChocolat and studies after work.
We were benchmarking different high-end confiserie in Dubai like Godiva, Sprungli, Eric Kayser, Vivel Patisserie, Patchi, to name a few because our plan was to create an international chocolate brand," Iman said.
Born on December 30, 1977 in Makati, Iman is finding ways on how to fully equip herself on the industry.
 
While searching the internet on where to get a high-grade cacao, she came across to Cacao Industry Development Authority in Mindanao or Cidami.
 
The program presented by the group on the proper propagation of cacao got her interest to immerse more and study the craft.
 
From Dubai, where she is presently based, Iman, her sister, and mother flew to Davao to join the cacao training.
 
"If we are going to create something, we will create it with maximum knowledge.
Our 67-year-old mother joined us because she loves plants and farming too.201d  
Right after she arrived in Manila on February 7, they flew to Davao to join the training.
 
Iman shared that for the whole week they stayed at the Philippine Coconut Authority  office with 18 other participants.
 
"We had classes during the day, both theory and practical on the farms, then in the evenings we would listen to our classmates who shared so much of their experience about farmers2019 plight and the cacao industry; many of whom were farmers, agriculturists, government workers, ex-OFWs who went into farming," the 38-year-old entrepreneur said.
 
The things she learned from her one week cacao training here in Davao City inspired her to explore more on the opportunity.
 
When she went back to Dubai after the training, she thought of making a group that can back-up the cacao farmers and cooperatives who are not that financially stable.
 
With her friends and some OFWS, they created 201cOFW para sa Magsasaka.201d  
"The cacao value chain has many opportunities, and as OFWs we thought very hard, 201cWhere can we maximally make a difference? Yes, we can certainly earn money if we just get a land and hire people to farm our land.
We also have a network with our classmates who can help us do this right, but maybe we can do more," says Iman who2019s married to Mohamed Gabr, a Geographic Information Systems expert.
 
According to Iman, who serves as the over-all strategist and marketing director of the venture that their group will invest for the propagation and development of a certain cacao farm.
 
They are open to talk with cacao farmers and cooperatives who want to expand their cacao farming but don2019t have the enough budget to do so.
 
They also imposed some qualifications and criteria to a group or farmers organization who can be qualified for the program.
 
"The ultimate goal of the group is basically to have equitable profits for all stakeholders.
Walang maaapi.
I know it2019s idealistic but I run my company with the same ideology in Dubai, I know it2019s doable when the people who run the organization are uncompromising.
I may not be filthy rich, but there2019s a lot of satisfaction when you know that the people who work for you, or with you, are happy and they know that."   
To the group of cacao farmers who are interested, Iman said that they can keep in touch with them at ofwparasamagsasaka@gmail.com or thru +9714-4357214.
 
201cMy dream is to go back home to the Philippines and raise my new family there.
I think bawat OFW ang pangarap niya is that he never has to leave his children and parents just trying to earn money.
And maybe with cacao farming and investment, we never have to think that the grass is much greener on the other side of the world.
We will love it in Mindanao because here it2019s much brown, there2019s more cacao,201d Iman said.
 
Before finding a job in Dubai, Iman was a research assistant at the Philippine General Hospital.
She graduated at the University of the Philippines in 2001 and passed the physical therapy licensure exam but she never got a chance to practice her degree.
 
In 2007, together with her younger sister Luchie, they received a scholarship from Citilife Group  and completed an entrepreneurial certificate at the University of Dubai.
  
After completing their first business plan and accomplishing the entrepreneurship course, Iman studied to become a professional marketer at the Chartered Institute of Marketing, UK.
  
She2019s been an expat in Dubai for 12 years now.
Her first six years were as as sales and marketing employee.
After that, she has become an entrepreneur.
 
With her hard work, she was able to put up Ahsant Premium Hotel Supplies & Specialized Gifts in Dubai, where she serves as founder and managing director.
 
She is also the brand director of Nypa 2013 a lifestyle brand that offers furnishings and amenities to hotels.
 
BFF economic drivers: Session Road in Bloom success stories, BFF economic drivers: Session Road in Bloom success stories
BAGUIO.
Tess, Chiara and AA Trinidad, a family of various fields of expertise will sooth your souls and make things just a little bit better with the help of a few crystals.

Maria Elena Catajan, MAYOR Mauricio Domogan said he never imagined the Baguio Flower Festival to be what it is today.

201cI never thought it was going to be of this magnitude,201d Domogan said starting from a small community event in the 902019s, it has become the largest festival in the North.

The mayor said on the onset of the festival 21 years ago, there was barely a P3M budget to fund the entire celebration with the JPDC pledging another million just to jumpstart the brainchild of Damaso Bagaoet and awaken the City to celebration.

Domogan said the City then just had a mere P15M derived from business tax, still reeling from the effects of the killer quake.

After 21 years of the flower festival, the city has a total annual budget reaching P2 billion and an internal revenue allotment of P600M.
201cIt has directly and indirectly affected us in terms of tourism and business,201d added Domogan.

Admitted to be one of the biggest economic drivers of the Mountain City, the annual Flower Festival has empowered entrepreneurs.
Session Road in Bloom
Session Road in Bloom  has proven to be one of the biggest crowd drawers of the Baguio Flower Festival  enriching the enterprising and delighting visitors on the array of products scattered in the two lane street.
SRB closes the stretch of the main road inviting traders to display their best wares, over 200 stalls then line the street with products from all over the country, making the city a shopper2019s paradise.
Trinkets, food, shoes and clothes lined the street making the street a treasure trove of lucky finds, walking along the streets will treat the ordinary visitor to a new world of merchandise.
Walking up and down the road will take one to a food experience that is one in its own.
Amparo2019s Apothecary
Amparo Moldero Magallanes is celebrating her second Session Road in Bloom, still high from the success of her previous year2019s debut.
201cIt was our introduction,201d recalled Magallanes.

Last year, after the SRB, Amparo opened her store in Loakan Road, near her home where she launched her complete product line.
201cAfter that we have gotten so busy,201d added Magallanes.

Amparo's Apothecary is a unique find of homemade, all natural products, handmade by the husband and wife team who are both locals to the City.

Amparo is retired from 15 years of jet setting as a flight stewardess of Delta Air and accidentally stumbled in to the business of making scents, soaps and creams, sprays, Body butter2019s, Anti Mosquito Oils, Coffee Scrubs and Bath Salts.

Amparo said the annual SRB will always be part of her year and is almost sure she will always come back.

Cake Artisan
It is the first time of Jonidi Reyes to have her own booth at the SRB although she has tried bazaars in the past and has a thriving business.
Her signature cakes, cupcakes and macaroons have proven to be a crowd drawer and you will see her stand to empty with refills going as fast as they came.

Reyes is a Baguio girl through and through, taking her education at Saint Louis University, she also worked briefly at the Baguio Country Club and at local shop, Everything Nice.
She makes custom fondant cakes for birthdays, baby showers, weddings, christening, anniversaries, bachelor2019s party and any event in between cakes of different sizes, shapes and colors, a specialty shop for the differently made fondant cakes are here in the city, pioneering the art of cake making.
Lightcatchers
Their stall is filled with soothing colors of crystals, stones and blessings, attracting a crowd who would ogle at the charms or a group who will bombard them with questions.

Tess, Chiara and AA Trinidad have been hardened SRB participants since almost a decade, saying the annual SRB is part of their routine as a family.

201cThis is a yearly endeavour,201d Tess said.

The family business of crystals started in 2008 in Abanao Square as both to quench the curiosity of Tess as well as to launch a new business.
201cI wanted to see if the crystals really work,201d Tess added.

Tess recounts on the first day of the shop, there was not much sales nor visitors for the whole day, then came 4 p.m.

201cI went home frustrated and sad, but then I thought, there is a few more hours, maybe things will turn around and when I came back to the shop...
the rest is history,201d added Tess.
 
Tess recalled 201cyou must give the crystals time to work, we must let them work.201d 
The family has various areas of expertise with seminars and workshops conducted all year round, and Tess is a certified law of attraction facilitator while her daughter Chiara, is one of two Angel Intuitive certified individuals in the country while AA focues on Feng Shui for the Yin and Yang home.

SRB is a venue for new businesses to take center stage, for locals to promote their up and coming ventures and convergence of unique finds and is becoming a convergence of success stories.
Pure heart , Pure heart 
Contributed photo.
AS AN ASPIRING seaman studying at the DMMA College of Southern Philippines, I stay at a dorm in Panorama Homes Subdivision in Buhangin, where every day a young boy never fails to catch my attention.
His voice serves as my alarm clock for me to wake up from my bed.
 
The young boy is just thirteen years old selling Pandesal early in the morning and Butchi in the afternoon.
His loud voice pierces the neighborhood din as he shouts out his products everyday.

My neighbors and I are his suki.
Despite his young age, he is able to endure the prickling and scorching hot weather as he walks on, shouting, selling.
 
To my mind, I had always this plan to interview the boy and ask what are his reasons for selling.
While other children his age may be hooked on some gadgets or shopping with their parents, he peddles every day.
 
I was finally able to ask him why he2019s doing what he2019s doing and his answer is simple: 201cPara makatabang sa akong mgaginikanan ug manghod .201d \t 
I learned that his mother is the helper in our dorm, while his father is a driver.
As much as his parents would like to provide their children with their necessities, their combined earnings are never be enough to feed the boy and his five younger siblings.
 \t
This amazing young soul, who inspire me and touched my heart, is Ricardo E.
Estrera also known by many as Jay-R.
He dreams to be a manager someday, he says.
  
A lot of families in the Philippines are like Jay-R2019s family.
There are others who are silent but needy, voices of scarcity; the voices that have never live comfortably.
These silent voices belong to the children of poverty.

They are the unheard voices of youth.
It is just one of the usual story of poor Filipinos, typical but deadly.
This problem should be prioritized in the maximum level of the next President of the Republic of the Philippines.
It is just a mirror of our own self and our country.
This means simply means, we should sacrifice in everything that we do.
Can you imagine what people do in order to survive?  
We are indeed blessed not to experience what Jay-R is experiencing right now.
We must value our time in doing good and meaningful things; not wasting any of our efforts in taking for granted the things we think are useless.
 
*****
Cadet Earlvin Joshua S.
Ortega is 18 years old and is the Editor-in-Chief of The DMMAxim, The official student publication of DMMA College of Southern Philippines, Tigatto Road, Buhangin, Davao City 
Food and colors  , Food and colors  
Contributed photo.
Stella A.
Estremera, THERE2019S a lot of colors in this new caf\xe9 at Las Casitas Inn II along Loyola Street in Barrio Obrero .

Batu Caf\xe9 is at its ground floor and is conveniently open from early morning until 1 a.m.
Batu Cafe has a wide menu to choose from 2013 from breakfast staples of sausages and bangus with egg to some Asian staples like pandan chicken, beef bulgogi, and siomai, plus some other entrees that will make it difficult for you to decide what you will have on your table.

But there was just the two of us that night 2013 Imee and I, and Imee was running late .

By then I was starving, and so I ordered pork siomai to stave off the hunger pangs.
The siomai is firm to the bite and should2019ve been nice, had it not been for that off-taste of the flour used.
I2019m sure it wasn2019t intended because the siomai had all the makings of a good one, but the distinctly rancid taste of flour gone bad, was there.

From that mishap, everything else turned out well.
Imee had the bulgogi beef rice, which is really filling and yummy.
It wasn2019t too sweet as some bulgogis tend to be, to pander to the Pinoy tastebuds.
We also go their ham and cheese croquettes, which I highly recommend.
It2019s made of real potato, which adds to the yum.

Although the hunger has already been alleviated by the siomai, I still opted to get a full meal serving of pandan chicken, simply because it looked photogenic in the menu.
I wasn2019t disappointed.
One order of pandan chicken gets you four pieces of chicken meat wrapped in pandan, a cup of fried rice with seven sidings for that mouth-watering bagoong rice.
We wanted to try the Mozzarella cheese balls, but we were already stuffed.

Food there is designed to fill you up.
Now onto the interiors, yes, we cannot leave this place without discussing about the interiors because it2019s a lively one.
Like walking into some Bohemian club where you2019re just waiting for a gypsy with her guitar walking in to sing to you.
Birds of Shrine Hills  , Birds of Shrine Hills  
Little Egret.

THREE months was all it took for me to photograph more than 30 different kinds of birds within the Shrine Hills area alone.
By Shrine Hills, I am referring to the expanse bounded by Maa Road, Diversion Road and Macarthur Highway.
 
Dabawenyos are familiar with birding areas here in this location - like the ponds near Davao Memorial Park and at Gardena Fresca inside Coca Cola Village at the eastern tip; the big trees inside the Shrine Hills Church compound at the ridge; and, Gap Farms at the western end.
 
Not too many are aware however that within the area are so many artesian springs.
Water + Trees = lots of birds.
 
And, we are not just talking of the cute-sized birds like flowerpeckers, flycatchers, bee eaters and sparrows.
Thick-billed crows, herons, waterhens, doves and the endemic  Philippine Coucal - all are medium to fairly large-sized birds that made Shrine Hills part of their home.

The bigger thing is, this is but one of the so many number of great birding sites within an hour2019s drive from the city center.
Other sites that people all over spend so much money just to go to are Bucana, Crocodile Park, Punta Dumalag, Eden as well as other nearby areas like the Panabo coastal road to the north and the Sirawan river mouth at Darong.
 
I had zero knowledge on birds and birding 3 months back.
Everything started when I noticed during my early morning walks that there are so many different kinds of birds perched on the electric wires.

So, I just armed myself with a camera one day and clicked on as many as I could without regard for composition, picture sharpness or what not and simply posted them at my FB page, hoping that someone among my friends know the difference between a shrike and a starling.
A friend referred me to a friend who referred me to the bird experts.
Talk about how fb can connect anyone to everyone - now I2019m hooked into birding!  
The whole adventure is vastly rewarding.
I discovered some people I know from way back are certified bird gurus and I am having a grand time reconnecting while learning.
On a personal note, birding surely has a lot to do with the way my blood pressure level went down.
The calming effect of how one learns to sit patiently for that picture opportunity is the perfect prescription to those who lead stressful lives.

Birding also provides people a refreshing mind set.
In the words of pro-birder Nilo Arribas, jr.
author of the nationally awarded book: Birds of Cebu and Bohol, Philippines - 201c that as individuals...
we are not really in 2018control2019 and that applies to even the most basic like natural lighting on a tiny bird.201d 
Want to try birding? Check out the fb accounts of the Wild Bird Club of the Philippines and the Philippine Bird Photography forum 2013 FB group.
 
They are a friendly lot who are more than willing to help newbies through.
 Martin Y.
Pineda 
The flag carrier soaring higher at 75 , The flag carrier soaring higher at 75 
DAVAO.
Flag carrier Philippine Airlines celebrates its 75th foundation day on March 15.
 
Jinggoy I.
Salvador, YEAR 2016 marks the 75th year in service of the flag carrier.

To celebrate the milestone, Philippine Airlines came bearing good news for the Davao travelers with no less than the President and COO, Jaime Bautista, flying in to town to share it.
 
201cIt has been two years since PAL held a press conference here in Davao City and indeed, I am very glad to be back in this vibrant Mindanao city,201d said the PAL president in his welcome speech.
Then he started sharing PAL2019s good news.
 
When PAL reinstated the Davao-Cebu flight in March 2015 and increased the frequency to twice daily a few months after, there was a bigger plan on the drawing board.
Truth to that is the new flight to be inaugurated on PAL2019s 75th founding anniversary on March 152014the Cebu to Long Angeles route.
 
PAL2019s newest international service between the Queen City of the South and the City of Angels is a part of the ongoing route expansion in response to the market demand.
 
At present, the airline has 25 weekly flights from Manila to the US.
 
201cWe wanted to increase the flight frequency from the Philippines to the US, but the Manila hub is congested.
Cebu is a solution to this congestion,201d Bautista said.

201cThis newest PAL service will enable our customers to enjoy more travel options to and from Los Angeles.
PAL patrons from the Visayas and Mindanao may hop to Mactan in Cebu via our domestic flights and then take the flight to LA.201d  
The PAL Cebu hub also connects to Nagoya, Osaka, Tokyo , and Seoul .
 
Why we should be hopping on this new flight to LA? With a round trip all-in fare of $650 to the City of Angels booked before March 15th, why shouldn2019t we? And that includes the domestic sector , which is offered free with the promotion.
  
The new 2016 routes of PAL to LA, Kuwait, Jeddah, Doha  and Saipan  will add to the 15 other new destinations launched in 2015 as part of PAL2019s route expansion.
 
Part of this expansion will include Europe, bared the PAL president.
  
Servicing the long haul routes will be six brand new wide-bodied planes, the Airbus 350-900 , which will allow PAL to fly non-stop to the European destination, and to New York and Toronto as well.
  
With more new planes coming, by 2020 PAL can boast that they have the youngest fleet of aircraft in the region with an average age of below four years old.
 
With the growing number of travelers in the country coupled with the increase of tourist arrivals causing the airport congestion in Manila, the PAL president said, 201cIt2019s only a matter of time before Davao will be an international hub for PAL.201d  Now, that is something to look forward to.
Email me at jinggoysalvador@yahoo.com.
For more lifestyle & travel stories visit http://apples-and-lemons.blogspot.com
Transforming Davao into an art haven, Transforming Davao into an art haven
DAVAO.
Ribbon Cutting ceremony to official; the Art Made Public at the Atrium of SM Lanang Premier.

Ace June Rell S.
Perez, ART knows no realm but everyone, rich or poor, mass or elite.
In bringing wining and exquisite works of art of contemporary Filipino artists, the Metrobank Foundation, Inc.
and SM Lanang Premier painted the Atrium of the mall Thursday night with creativity and passion as a conduit to bringing art closer to the public for deeper art understanding and appreciation, essential to sculpt the art phenoms of today.
The travelling retrospective art exhibit dubbed as 201c2016 Art MADE Public,201d was launched in the city last March 3 and runs until March 7 at the mall2019s Atrium.
The exhibit is open to the public.
With the prestigious exhibit, Dabawenyos are given access to artwork masterpieces of 15 Filipino artists who were notable past Metrobank Art and Design Excellence , one of the country2019s most prestigious art and design recognition program.
The 15 masterpieces made flesh by 15 brilliant contemporary Filipino artists are seen as bridges to the artistic senses of the viewing public.
These artists and artworks are Christopher H.
Zamora , Don Bryan Michael R.
Bunag , Anthony E.
Palomo , Benjamin D.
Elayda, III , Ronson Culibrina , Rex S.
Tatlong Hari , Arthor P.
Moreno , Ferdinand B.
Montemayor , Andrew Tan , Norman B.
Dreo , Raffy T.
Napay , Ronante S.
Maratas , Herbert J.
Pajarito , Salvador J.
Ching , and Stanley Gallermo .
Now on its 4th year, 201cArt Made Public201d in celebration with the 32nd anniversary of Made aims to hone art phenoms and raise the bar of public2019s appreciation for the arts and promote arts and design excellence to young Filipino artists and to-be-artists.

This year2019s celebration centers on the theme: 201cFinding Phenoms in Art.201d
Alongside the exhibit, a free lecture series on painting, sculpture, architecture and interior design for students, a 201cHeart for Healing Workshop201d for the differently abled, were held last Friday and Saturday, respectively.
201cLet2019s all be part of the celebration of talents and creativity be as one in our pursuit of enabling young Filipinos to learn more about art and have a deeper understanding of its profound true meaning,201d Henry Shalimar D.
Palma, Metrobank Art and Design Excellence Unit program coordinator said.
He added that a lot of Mindanao artists already joined the Made program of the bank.
Director Roberto Alabado III, of thge Department of Tourism  said that event2019s like this will essentially transform Davao into an Art haven and will bode well for a city2019s art development scene and people2019s appreciation.
The exhibit, prior to its run in SM Lanang, was staged in SM Aurora Premier, SM Seaside City Cebu  and SM Center Agono.
Celebrating extraordinary women  , Celebrating extraordinary women  Pamela Jay F.
Orias, WHEN we think of empowered and successful women, what usually pops in our minds are perhaps Amelia Earhart, Oprah Winfrey, Hillary Clinton, or in the country, we think of Gabriela Silang and the unsung brave women who fought against slavery and colonialism and rose against submission.

We also the contemporary celebrities like Monique Wilson who helps in advocating the 201cOne Billion Rising,201d Gloria Diaz, Senator Miriam Santiago and those other women who have ranking positions in the society.
Truth is, there are also the other women who do the action in the community, in their homes, in the streets, sometimes we seem them too often in their offices stuck with paperworks but still go home to tuck their children in bed and whisper their husbands goodnight.
Take for example Marilyn Edzel, 34, a teacher, married and has three kids.
Marilyn is married for 10 years now, thought she was in for a treat after she married her dream guy but she thought wrong.
Barely after two years of their marriage, her husband, who's away for work abuses her emotionally, texting her hurtful messages about infidelity, and threatens to break up their marriage.

"One time, gi-text niya sa akong mga kauban sa trabaho na naa daw koy lain, dili daw ko makontento, katol daw ko," Marilyn said.
"I was on the verge of breaking down and giving the marriage up, because it's been years and it's always the same situation but I can't just do it, I can throw it all away, especially now that I have kids," Marilyn said.
When you have kids, everything else changes, she said adding that "marriage is not all about husband and wife anymore, it's all about your children."
Marilyn tried marriage counseling and hoped everything will work out again.
"I gave it a shot, I still love him and I think it was a success, so far, murag ning-work out man pud," she said.
"You really cannot blame me if I chose not to leave his side, it's a promise I made not only to him, to God, but for my children," she added.
It is a different case for Annie Casana, 45, has one kid and raised him all by herself.
Being a single mom, she said, is something she chose to have.
"It's a decision I made.
I was 20 then and did something reckless, so I got pregnant.
The guy was not my boyfriend, just someone from school I knew," she said.
"Ang naka-bilib was the guy was not a coward, he actually offered to marry me, but I said no.
I was not ready for marriage, and accepting it would just be too much especially I had a baby boy coming," Annie said.
Annie thanked her parents for allowing her to decide on her own and not forced her to do something she said she would regret for the rest of her life.

"I have never felt more empowered than that moment, I look back and I smile.
I am proud of myself, I say.
And I have someone too now, someone special.
In choosing someone, you don't have to rush it, it takes time," Annie added.
Another empowered woman is Police Inspector Maricris Mulat, former chief of Tagoloan police.
Mulat was chosen as one of the awardees of the 2015 Search for the Country2019s Outstanding Police Officers in Service .
In an interview, Mulat said there was never a time when she doubted her capacity just because she is a woman.
Instead, she took it as an advantage.
201cKaya man sa uban, nganu dili man nako makaya?201d Mulat added.
Already in her 16 years in service, Mulat said she takes the problems as 2018challenges,2019 adding that it gets 2018exciting2019 and 2018fulfilling2019 everyday as long as 2018your heart is in it.2019
Mulat specializes on domestic violence and operations against illegal drugs.
201cMy mother was a victim of domestic violence, so gihatagan sab gyud ni nako na area ug priority.
So, we conduct information drive or mga seminars against domestic violence in my area of responsibility,201d she said.
Mulat has two kids, a boy and a girl, both in their adolescence, and a supportive husband.
201cAkong pamilya dili gyud babag sa akong pagpanerbisyo, they have always been so supportive.
Akong mga bata, ang ilang namat-an gayud, akong trabaho na pagka-police,201d Mulat said.
For businesswoman Caravelle Togle-Barnido who is a mother of four, empowerment is motherhood.

201cThat's all there is to it.
Nothing else beats being a mother.
I can proudly say that all of my accomplishments in this world, being a mother 2013 becoming a mother is the best of them all.
If men were to get pregnant and endure labor and birthing pains, I think there would be fewer pregnancies, .
Childbirth is an endurance test.
I seriously thought I was going to die during my first.
It was THAT painful.201d 
It was still painful for her other deliveries.
But seeing her daughter for the first time vanished all the pain.
She said it remained that way for the three more pregnancies 2013 another daughter and two sons.
201cI say it with pride, that I delivered four babies .
I was a sucker for punishment.
My doctor said it would be nice for me to experience the actual pain of childbirth.
I went along with it.
She said it would be painful.
She never said I would feel like I was going to die.
But hey, I survived it!!!201d
Barnido felt empowered as a woman each time she gave birth.
Every stretch mark, every discomfort, every tear, every pain was her badge of honor.
201cIt was mine and mine alone.
I was proud that I carried these children below my heart and in me for nine months.
It was a bond not easily severed.201d 
She said her husband helped her with the child rearing and the children are close to their father and added, 201cbut the mother and child bond is so much deeper than that.

I was responsible for these children.
Their lives depended on me until they were ready to face the world.
How they contribute to society would be a testament to how I raised them.201d  
She hopes that the government can provide access to better and safer health care especially to expectant mothers, daycare centers in work areas for working mothers and for the schools to teach girls traditional boy skills like mechanics, carpentry and the like and also more girls in sports.
Celebrating Women2019s Month is a good enough reason for women all over the world to focus on themselves yet doing service to others whatever the means.
This month, you matter, this month, dare to shout 201cI am empowered.201d 
Masbad: USB-C and the S7 and G5, Masbad: USB-C and the S7 and G5Roark L.
Masbad, Wacky Tech, USB.
1.
2.
3.
C.
They2019re everywhere.
Almost all of our gadgets connect via and use USB.
This latest iteration of USB is here and is here to stay.
What is it exactly? Here2019s a clinical definition, description from an article by PCMag:
USB-C is the hot, new industry standard connector and cable used for connectivity and power.
The USB-C connector was developed by the USB Implementers Forum, the group of companies that has developed, certified, and shepherded the USB standard.
It counts over 700 companies in its membership, including Apple, Dell, HP, Intel, Microsoft, and Samsung.
This is important, because it's more likely to be accepted by the majority of PC manufacturers.
Contrast this with the Apple-promoted  Lightning and MagSafe connectors, which have limited acceptance beyond Apple products.
I first saw this on the brand new Apple Macbook.
It2019s quite the attractive connection if you ask me.
It2019s thin and it promises to be the one, single connection you2019ll ever need -- power, peripherals, etc.

If you already have the Macbook or any other laptop that2019s using USB-C, you2019ll probably want to go through this article from Mashable and get your hands on one or two of the accessories they featured.
On other news, the Samsung Galaxy S7 and the LG G5 might turn out to be the next iPhone2019s two biggest competitors.
And they2019re both launching within the next month.
Tech Insider describes the S7: 
The Galaxy S7 brings back two of three: Samsung's flagship smartphone once again supports micro SD storage, and it's waterproof at a depth of up to 1.5 meters.
Galaxy S7 owners will not be able to replace the battery, but they can recharge it quickly, even wirelessly, and it's more than 17% larger than the one found in the Galaxy S6.
And in the same article, the LG G5 was described as a "dramatic departure from its predecessor201d.
How is it different aside from the usual fare? 
The phone's lower bezel is replaceable, and can be swapped out for a variety of different modules that expand the device's functionality.
I2019m somehow excited about the G52019s modularity.
Hopefully, other accessory manufacturers would be able to come up with innovative modules to make the phone really fun to use.

But what I am looking forward more to is how this will turn out to be for these three companies - Apple, LG and Samsung.
Could there be more innovations to come for the smartphone category? 
Only time will tell.

Music in fight for justice, Music in fight for justice
DAVAO.
Artists from Manila join the protest in calling for justice against discrimination of lumads in Mindanao.
Christine Joice C.
Cudis, AS THE voices of human rights protectors appeared to have gone nowhere and remained to be unheard over years of rallying on the streets and in front of government offices, an organization diverted its strategy to be heard -- this time to a more creative way.
Salupongan International , a solidarity network inspired by the aspirations of the Manobo Talaingod tribe who united their villages to defend their ancestral land and rainforest from being destroyed by corporate loggers decades ago in the Southern Mindanao Region, and Save Our Schools  Network, a child rights group together with Davao-based, Kilab multimedia, formed another music video dedicated to document the long enduring struggle of indigenous people to defend what was supposed to be their rights.
SI and SOS are hoping to capture the interest of a wider audience inputting light to the situation of the Lumad evacuees who are now taking shelter in the United Church of Christ in the Philippines  Haran compound along Father Selga Street.
As part of their objective to provide awareness among those who have not fully grasp the hapless situation of the lumads who were forced to move out from their communities in Talaingod, Kapalong, Davao del Norte and Barangay White Kulaman, Kitaotao, Bukidnon, the groups launched on Saturday a simultaneous viewing of their second music video, entitled "Salupongan" which means unity at UCCP Haran and at the University of the Philippines Diliman Film Institute.
SI board member Leah Valle, in an interview, said that the incorporation of arts in their fight for justice plays a vital role for the community's acceptance of the issue.
She also added that the support from influential people in different parts of the country gained an impression to the public that whatever they are doing is not any form of rebellion against the government as some people label them as leftists for joining the cause.
"Art is the soul of a human.
We may not notice it but we understand better through art, it could be through literary, musical, and performance art.
Thus, we are educating people through these music videos which we see as a form of transjournalism.
It means it encompasses multiple media in an expansive way; hence, reaching a bigger audience," Valle explained.
Multi-awarded artist Maan Chua also graced the event and shared her songs on the roots and culture of Mindanao, reminding the lumads of their prerogative to till their lands without fear of being attacked by men who want to take them away from their communities rich in mineral resources.
In an interview, Chua said: "When you mix music with social issues, it will live forever and people will know about it.
I have the right to write songs about Mindanao because this is where I live, I have the right to tell those who need to listen, what happens here." 
Chua is also part of the first music video released by SI, SOS, and Kilab Multimedia with the title, "Mindanaw".
It is accessible through YouTube under the Salugpongan International account.
The latest music video is directed by Carlos Siguion Reyna which features over a hundred musicians and actors, including John Arcilla, Aiza Seguerra, Isay Alvarez, Robert Se\xf1a, Bayang Barrios, Mae Paner, Christopher de Leon, Edgar Mortiz, Bimbo Cerrudo, CrisVillonco, Lorenz Martinez, Myke Salomon and music groups like Baihana, Patatag, UP Cherubim and Seraphim, Coro de Sta.
Cecilia, along with a dozen lumad musicians.
The event is part of the month-long Mindalakbayan for land, environment, and human rights and justice.
It will serve as a venue to hear the voices of the Lumad and advocates speak on the current campaign against the intensifying militarization, violations, and killings of Indigenous Peoples in Mindanao.

Fittingly, "Salupongan" music video calls on everyone to come together to defend and uphold the rights, welfare, and future of the Lumads.
Forbes Philippines focuses on women in business, Forbes Philippines focuses on women in business
University of Cebu chancellor Yvette Candice Gotianuy in Forbes Philippines2019 cover
IN LINE with the celebration of International Women2019s Month this March, Forbes Philippines is featuring Yvette Candice Gotianuy, chancellor of the country's biggest private university.
As head of the University of Cebu , the campus heiress draws the volume by providing affordable, good quality education for students in the Visayas and Mindanao.
201cIf I am able to give our students the technical knowhow and expertise so they can get a fulfilling job, that, to me, is fulfilling,201d Gotianuy told Forbes Philippines.
In the same issue, Forbes Philippines also writes about Rizalina 201cRiza201d Mantaring, president and CEO of Sun Life Financial Philippines, the country's largest life insurer.
Whether racing a marathon, managing IT projects or running Sun Life, Mantaring sets impossibly high goals, and then works harder than most to meet them.
201cYou go as far as you2019re willing to work for,201d Mantaring said.
 Other stories in the March 2016 issue include a profile on Fil-Am venture capitalist Eric Manlunas who found at least two startups with valuations growing past a billion dollars.
The magazine also ran a feature on Airfreight 2100 and how it grew to become the third largest local forwarder.

Forbes Philippines is the premier business magazine of choice of affluent business leaders, decision makers, investors, executives and entrepreneurs.
The March issue is now available on newsstands and in bookstores, convenience stores, and supermarkets nationwide.
A digital edition of Forbes Philippines is also available for download on your mobile device through Apple Newsstand, Buqo, and Zinio.
For more details, visit Forbes Philippines on Facebook: facebook.com/forbesphilippines.

Be better this summer! , Be better this summer! 
Image courtesy of freepik.com and clipartsign.com
Janette Huang-Teves, IN-BETWEEN work, driving my kids to different venues for their summer classes has been a tradition for the past years.

Many of my parent-friends agree that they are actually busier during summer than during regular school classes because of these various activities.
But, seeing the satisfied faces of our children after their fun summer classes make the stress well worth it! The enhanced skills and talents, new friends, and sense of accomplishment are priceless.
I hope that, through the years, I have helped you become informed on how to make your kids better at any talent or skill during summer and beyond.
I present to you the 2016 Kiddie Summer Workshops of Davao City!
ARTS AND CRAFTS
WHAT: International Art Program 
SUMMER PROMO 1: Refer 1 friend  get 1 free lesson each
SUMMER PROMO 2: 8 hours + 1 free hour lesson 
COURSES: Oil Pastel, Acrylic Painting, Glass Panting, Poster Color Painting, Watercolor Painting, Clay Sculpture, Cartoon and Comic and Sketching
SCHEDULE: March 28-April 02; April 04-09; April 11-16; April 18-23; April 25-30; May 02-07; May 09-14; May 16-21; May 23-28, 2016
TIME: Morning 9:00 a.m.
to 10:30 a.m., 10:30 a.m.
to 12:00 a.m., Afternoon 1:00 p.m.
to 2:30 p.m., 2:30 p.m.
to 4:00 p.m., 4:00 p.m.
to 5:30 pm 
FEE: Available upon request 
Also available all year round international art program
CONTACT: Globalart Davao, 301 E Palma Gil St.
Bo.
Obrero .
Tel.
2219980 or 3009980; Cell.
nos.
09234814333 or 09424620002
***
WHAT: Summer Art Class
MEDIUM: Pencil and pastels on paper; Acrylic on canvas
LESSONS: Still life, Landscape, Composition, Anime, Human Figure 
SCHEDULE: Starts April 11, 2016 ; MWF; 2-4pm with exhibit after 10 sessions
FEE: Available upon request 
VENUE: Tulip Drive, Matina, Davao City
CONTACT: MEAN TAN GUINOO, Tel.
2858818; Cell no.
3220320
*Note: Teacher Mean will be integrating a few elements of design class with baking for her younger students.
There will be a one-day session for field trip or cafe experience, depending on the age of the students.
Whoever is interested has to text or call her right after the Holy Week because class is limited to 10 students only.
***
WHAT: Art Kamp 2016.
Painting in Acrylic Basix and Beyond.
Form.
Line.
Color.
Space.
Texture.
Imagination
SCHEDULE: April 6-9 2016, 8:30 a.m.
to 11:00 a.m.
FEE: Available upon request 
VENUE: Casa Munda, Juna Subd., Matina, D.C.
CONTACT: DADAI JOAQUIN, Cellphone no.
328-0100
***
WHAT: Kiddie Fun Arts for 4-12 years old.
Kids begin developing their artistic abilities at an early age.
Making arts encourage children to use their imagination.
Kiddie fun arts are both enjoyable to make and can be a perfect gift for loved ones and friends.
SCHEDULE: April 4-15, 2016; 10 sessions 
FEE: P3,000 inclusive of materials 
CONTACT: TENDER YEARS, #7 Gemini St., Dona Vicenta Vill., D.C./Tel.
2244884
***
COURSE: Fashion Institute of Design and Arts2019  Summer Offerings
WHAT: Workshop for kids ages 6-12 years old
Sewing Camp for Kids  
Arts & Crafts for Kids 
Brush Lettering for Kids
Polymer Clay Workshop
Artistic Painting for Kids
Fabric Doll Making for Kids
Stuff Toy Making for Kids
Basic Cross Stitch for Kids
Basic Knitting 
TEENS & ADULT WORKSHOPS: Sewing Camp For Teens
SCHEDULES AND FEES: Available upon request
CONTACT: FASHION INSTITUTE OF DESIGN AND ARTS , Patio Valencia Compound, Jacinto Ext., D.C./Tel.
2853404/8119696 
***
One-stop shop
WHAT: Artistic Fun Summer 2016
COURSE: Music Lessons 
FEE: Available upon request
OTHER COURSES:  Drawing and Painting Workshop/Hip hop
FEE: Available upon request
Note: Free two additional sessions  when you register/enroll on or before March 30, 2016
CONTACT: JHINE2019S MUSIC AND ART CENTER PHILS., Unit 2, Pelayo Bldg., Camus Ext., D.C./Tel.
3008081/09176487788
***
WHAT: LEAD  Summer Workshop 2016 
COURSE: Guitar Lesson for Kids and Teens
SCHEDULE: Starts April 11, 2016; TThS.
Combined class 230-330pm
WORKSHOP FEE: P3,800 includes workshop T-shirt, workshop certificate and summer production show
PRODUCTION FEE: P2,000
COURSE: Keyboard Lesson for Kids and Teens
SCHEDULE: Starts April 11, 2016; TThS.
Individual class 3:30 p.m.
to 4:30 p.m.
WORKSHOP FEE: P4,000 includes workshop T-shirt, workshop certificate and summer production show
PRODUCTION FEE: P2,000
COURSE: VocaLEdge or Singing Workshop
SCHEDULE: Starts April 4, 2016; MWF, Beginners: 1 to 2 p.m.; Intermediate: 2-3 p.m., Advanced: 3:30 p.m.

WORKSHOP FEE: P3,800 includes workshop T-shirt, workshop certificate and summer production show
PRODUCTION FEE: P2,000
COURSE: Feature Writing Workshop
SCHEDULE: Starts April 12, 2016; TThS, Combined class: 10:30 a.m.
to 12 p.m.
WORKSHOP FEE: P3,800 includes press shirt, set meal for coffee shop round table conference with VIP guests, certificate and summer production show
CONFERENCE AND PRODUCTION FEE: P2,000
COURSE: Communication Empowerment with Stage Hosting
SCHEDULE: Starts April 11, 2016; MWF, Kids: 9:30 to 10:30 a.m.; Teens: 10:30-11:30 a.m.
WORKSHOP FEE: P3,500 ; P3,800  includes workshop shirt, workshop certificate and summer production show
PRODUCTION FEE: P2,000
COURSE: Fashion Modelling open for kids, teens, boys and girls 
SCHEDULE: Starts April 12, 2016; TThS, Kids: 9:30 a.m.
to 10:30 a.m.; Teens: 1 p.m.
to 2 p.m.
WORKSHOP FEE: P3,800 includes Ledge workshop shirt, customized designer2019s collection wear, photo shoot , certificate and summer production show
PRODUCTION FEE: P2,000  and P2,500 
COURSE: Ledge Hip hop Dance Class
SCHEDULE: Starts April 11, 2016; MWF, Kids: 9:30 a.m.
to 10:30 a.m.; Teens: 10:30 a.m.
to11:30 a.m.
FEE: Available upon request
OTHER SPECIAL COURSES: Adult Ballet, Stiletto Dance Workout
SCHEDULE AND FEE: Available upon request
CONTACT: LEDGE CREATIVE STUDIO, Valencia Corporate Center, Jacinto Ext.
cor.
Arellano St., D.C.; Tel.
2274228; Cel.
nos.
1625820;  7434556.
Email: ledgecreativeteam@gmail.com.
FB page: Ledge Royeca
***
WHAT: Various Summer Programs for Kids: The Colors of Summer.
Classes start April 18, 2016
COURSES:
Smartcubs 
Playphonics 
Toddler's Exploration 
Reading Breeze 
Funtastic Math 
Smartplay
Arts and Crafts
SCHEDULE AND FEE: Available upon request.
Packages available.
CONTACT: STOCKBRIDGE AMERICAN INTERNATIONAL SCHOOL , Araullo-Mabini Sts., D.C./Tel.2251847 or 09222501494 ;  3010111 / 0923 2013 6595469; E-mail: info@stockbridge.ph.

***
WHAT: Music Theatre:  A program integrating one-on-one voice lessons, group voice classes and theatre workshops for both grade school and high school students.
Starts 2nd week of April 2016.
SCHEDULE: 18 sessions
WHAT: Musikids for kids ages 2.5-5 years old
SCHEDULE: 12 sessions 2x a week 
WHAT: Private Voice: Go one-on-one with a vocal coach for an intensive and more focused training
SCHEDULE: 12 sessions
WHAT: Private Piano, Guitar and Violin:  Go one-on-one with a piano, guitar or violin instructor.

SCHEDULE: 12 sessions
WHAT: Group Voice and Group Guitar for Beginners
SCHEDULE: 12 sessions
FEE: Available upon request
CONTACT: MUSIKADEMY, 209 McArthur's POD, McArthur Highway, Matina, Davao City/Tel.297-4542 
***
WHAT: Spotlight Personality Empowerment Workshops for ages 11 and above
Includes Leadership, Public Speaking, Acting, Fashion and Makeup
SCHEDULE: April 12-May 14, 2016/TTh, 1 p.m.
to 5 p.m.
FEE: P6,500
WHAT: STARTER Workshop for 6-10 years old
Includes Acting, Modeling, Public Speaking and Dancing
SCHEDULE: April 12-May 14, 2016/TTh, 9am-12nn
FEE: P4,500
VENUE: LOUNGE ONE STUDIO, North Zen Hotel, Lapu-Lapu cor.
Sobrecarey Sts., D.C.
CONTACT: JO-ANN FANDINO, 8384981.
For more details, www.spotlightworkshop.blogspot.com
***
Personality development and public speaking 
COURSE: Various Summer Programs for Kids, Teens and Adults
- Teens Poise, Personality Development and Modeling 
- Powerful Speech for Elementary, High School, College and Professionals
- Theater Arts 
SCHEDULE: Starts April 11, 2016
FEE: Available upon request
CONTACT: JOJI ILAGAN CAREER CENTER FOUNDATION, INC.
, Gov.
Chavez Street; Tel: 2275602; 0917 577 7336; www.facebook.com/jibcharmschool
***
Culinary arts
COURSE: Summer Cooking and Baking Workshop for Kids & Teens 
SCHEDULE: April 25 and 26, 2016  8:00 a.m.
- 12 p.m.
 
FEE: P2,300.00 inclusive of all ingredients, use of tools and equipment, and certificate 
CONTACT: GOURMET BITES, Ilustre St.
, D.C.
Call 2957178 or text 09088933498
***
COURSE: Culinary Summer Program for Kids, Teens and Adults.
Classes start on April 11, 2016
WHAT: Young Executive Chef
*Learn the Basic Cooking and Baking Techniques with actual preparation of quick and easy dishes from soups to the desserts of the world together with the masters of ICHEF, Chefs Rene Custodio, Clinton Gregorio and Jumil Dela Torre.
Plus special sessions on basic fine dining service, the art of table set-up and arrangement, and fine dining etiquette.
SCHEDULE: 12 sessions; 1 p.m.
to 5 p.m.; MWF 
WHAT: Junior Chef De Patisserie with Chef Clinton Gregorio
*Indulge your sweet tooth with a Basic Pastry and Baker2019s Course
SCHEDULE: 10 sessions; 8 a.m.
to 12 p.m.; MWF 
WHAT: Junior Chef De Cuisine with Chefs Rene Custodio and Jumil Dela Torre
*International cuisine includes Japanese, Chinese, Spanish, Italian and American
SCHEDULE: 6 sessions; 9am-12nn; Mon.-Sat.
FEE: Available upon request
WHAT: Basic Pastry
SCHEDULE: 8 sessions; 9 a.m.
to 12 p.m.; every Saturday; 
WHAT: Basic Culinary 
SCHEDULE: 8 sessions; 9 a.m.
to 12 p.m.; every Saturday
FEE: Available upon request
CONTACT:  INSTITUTE OF INTERNATIONAL CULINARY AND HOSPITALITY ENTREPRENEURSHIP, S.
De Jesus Street; Tel no.: 305 8833; 9298154; www.facebook.com/ichefphilippines
***
WHAT: Basic Baking for 4-12 years old.
If your child needs a boost of self-confidence,  baking will do just that.
They are accomplishing a task, learning something important and contributing to the family.
Teaching kids to bake will help instill skills to last them a lifetime.
All of their baking activities are kid-tested, doable and fun.
They just need: a dash of time, a pinch of originality, and a cup of enthusiasm.
SCHEDULE: April 18-29, 2016; 10 sessions 
FEE: P3,000 inclusive of materials and cookbook
CONTACT: TENDER YEARS, #7 Gemini St., Dona Vicenta Vill., D.C./Tel.
2244884
***
Dance and Theater
WHAT: I-Sayaw2019s 2nd Summer Dance Workshop offers Ballet, Tap and Hip-Hop
SCHEDULE: Starts on April 4, 2016.
Culminating activity is on May 22, 2016 at SM City Davao Atrium Annex
THEME: Disney Classics to Classics
COURSE: Ballet class for 3 yrs.
old, teens and adults.
Beginner 1 and 2 for toddlers; Beginner Teens; Intermediate; Advanced Levels and Fitness Ballet
SCHEDULE:  New ballet students MWF; Beginner: 9:30 a.m.
to 10:30 a.m.; Beginner Teens: 10:30 a.m.
to 12:00 p.m.; with ballet training: TThS; Beginner 2: 4:00 p.m.
to 5:00 p.m.; Intermediate: 5:00 p.m.
to 6:30 p.m.; Advanced: 6:30 p.m.
to 8:00 p.m.
COURSE: Tap open to Beginners 1 and 2.
Students will be assessed during the first week of classes
SCHEDULE:  MWF-1:30-2:30pm and 2:30-3:30pm
COURSE: Hip hop open to all levels.
Student will be assessed during first week of classes
SCHEDULE:  MWF, 3:30-4:30pm and 4:30-5:30pm
FEE: Available upon request.
Combo packages available
NOTE: Students will be assessed for class assignments
VENUE: I-SAYAW DANCE CENTER, Unit 207 McPod Bldg.
, McArthur Highway, D.C.

CONTACT: CECILE DIOQUINO-HIDALGO/Tel.
no.
8493966
***
WHAT: Summer Urban Dance Workshop for kids 6 yrs.
old and below with Bryan Grandeza and Groove Unlimited Dance Community choreographers
SCHEDULE:  Starts April 6, 2016.
Monday to Thursday, 9 a.m.
to 10 a.m.
FEE: Available upon request
VENUE: ANGELS AT WORK, N.
Torres cor.
Vinzon Sts., Bo.
Obrero, D.C./Tel.
2250208
***
WHAT: Summer Urban Dance Workshop for 7-12 yrs.
old and Teens with Bryan Grandeza and Groove Unlimited Dance Community choreographers
SCHEDULE: Starts April 5, 2016 ; April 4 
FEE: Available upon request
VENUES: STUDIO 51, Artiaga St., D.C.
.
Tel.
2210753 or 7551305 or HOLIDAY GYM AND SPA, F.
Torres St., DC/Tel.
2223041/2223594; 7560559
***
WHAT: LCB Summer Dance Workshop 2016 with culminating recital on May 15, 2016 
SCHEDULE: April 1-May 15, 2016
COURSES OFFERED: For kids and teens-ballet, jazz, tap, hip-hop, acting and voice; For adults-belly dancing, advanced and beginners2019 jazz, advanced and beginner2019s tap
FEES: P5,000 for dance, acting and voice.
No recital fee but students are given allocation of 20 tickets each for matinee and gala recital show  worth P3,000.
ALSO OFFERS: Tang Soo Doo-Karate , P3,500; Kickboxing P1,500 /P1,200 , Body Conditioning and Brazilian Jujitsu , P800 /P1,000 
FEE: P4,000 for the summer
CONTACT: LCB PERFORMING ARTS CENTER FOUNDATION, INC.,    48 Villamor St., Bo.
Obrero,  D.C./Tel.2225205
***
WHAT: Royeca School of Ballet Summer Dance Showcase; open for ages 3 yrs.
and above for Nursery, Primary, Beginners 1, 2, 3 and 4, Intermediate and Advanced Class
DATE: April 1 - May 10, 2016 with Recital Day 
SCHEDULE: MWF 
WORKSHOP FEE: P3,600  
RECITAL FEE: P3,800 
Also offers Adult Ballet, Hip hop, Taekwondo and Aikido.
Schedules available upon request
CONTACT:  ROYECA SCHOOL OF BALLET, Valencia Compound , Jacinto Ext., Arellano, D.C./Tel.
No.
227-4228
***
WHAT: Ballet class under the tutelage of Irma Bringas-Aguado following the principles of Royal Academy of Dance-London
DATE: April 7-May 28, 2016
SCHEDULE: Available upon request
FEE: Classical ballet, P5,000 ; Modern Ballet, P2,000 once a week, 8 classes
CONTACT: HOLIDAY GYM AND SPA, F.
Torres St., DC/Tel.
2223041; Irma Aguado, Tel.
3056342 and cell.
No.
7189488 
***
Comupter course
WHAT: Basic Computer Courses for Kids and Teachers
COURSE: CYBER WIZARD  for 24 hours
FEE: P5,200 
COURSE: MULTIMEDIA WIZARD I  for 20 hours
FEE: P5,200 
COURSE: MULTIMEDIA WIZARD II  for 20 hrs.
FEE: P5,200 
COURSE: ANIMATION WIZARD  for 20 hrs.
FEE: P5,200 
COURSE: GRAPHICS WIZARD  for 20 hrs.
FEE: P5,200 
COURSE: MS APPs WIZARD  for 20 hrs.
FEE: P5,200 
CONTACT: DELTYX TECHNOLOGIES INC.
, Tel.
2244643; 3214427.
***
WHAT: Digital Summer Camp  in partnership with Power Mac Center for students ages 7-12
COURSES: Module 1: Robotics Programming featuring Sphero; Module 2: From Character Design to Game Creation; Module 3: App Development for Kids; Module 4: Stop Motion Video Creation; and Module 5: Interactive eBooks Creation
SCHEDULE: March 14-18, 2016, 1 p.m.
to 3 p.m.

FEE: P5,000
CONTACT: GALILEO ENRICHMENT CENTER-DAVAO, 27-A Dacudao Avenue, D.C./Tel.
2210268; 8501650
***
Summer enrichment program
COURSE: 2016 FUN SUMMER ACTIVITIES FOR TODDLERS
WHAT: Toddler2019s Playgroup 1: Age: 2-2.5 years old.
Activities include Skills Readiness Play and Creative Arts
SCHEDULE: Batch 1: April 11-29; Batch 2: May 2-24 
WHAT: Toddler2019s Playgroup 2: Age: 2.6-3 yrs.old.
Activities include Skills Building Play and Creative Arts
SCHEDULE: Batch 1: April 11-29; Batch 2: May 2-24 
WHAT: Children2019s Playgroup 1: Age: 3.1 - 4 years old.
Activities: Stories, Songs, Skills Development Play and Creative Arts
SCHEDULE: Batch 1: April 11-29; Batch 2: May 2-24 
WHAT: Children2019s Playgroup 2: Age: 4.1 2013 5.9 yrs.old.
Activities: Stories, Songs, Cooperative Play and Arts and Crafts
SCHEDULE: Batch 1: April 11-29; Batch 2: May 2-22 
WHAT: Kid2019s Crafts: Age: 6-8 years old.
Activities: Crafts Building Skill
SCHEDULE: Batch 1: April 11-29; Batch 2: May 2-22 
CONTACT: BRIGHT SEEDS PRESCHOOL, Dona Vicenta Road, Dona Vicenta Village, D.C.
; Tel.
3003286; 5400988
***
WHAT: Galileo 2016 Summer Programs
COURSES: Math-Number Writing and Math Hacks for ages 3-12; English-Writing It Right and Read Think Wink for ages 3-12; Singapore Math-Math Attack for ages 6-12; Financial Literacy Program-Earn, Save, Spend, Donate and Invest for ages 7-12; Little Explorers Summer Learning Camp  for ages 1.5-3 years old.
SCHEDULES AND FEES: Available upon request
CONTACT: GALILEO ENRICHMENT CENTER-DAVAO, 27-A Dacudao Avenue, D.C./Tel.
2210268; 8501650
***
WHAT: Summer Enrichment Class for ages 2-5 years old 
SCHEDULE: April 4- May 6, 2016; M-F/ 9 a.m.
to 11 a.m.

FEE: P6,000 inclusive of snacks and materials 
CONTACT: ANGELS AT WORK, N.
Torres cor.
Vinzon Sts., Bo.
Obrero, D.C./Tel.
2250208
***
WHAT: Kiddie Fun Time for 1.5-3 yrs.
old.
This program is designed to introduce children gradually to their first school experience.
Warm and responsive teachers work with the children to facilitate their transition from home to school.
Activities involve free play, music and movement, storytelling, arts and crafts, and outdoor play.
SCHEDULE: Batch 1: April 4-8; Batch 2: April 11-15; Batch 3: April 18-22; and Batch 4: April 25-29, 2016; 5 sessions 
FEE: P2,000 inclusive of snacks and materials 
CONTACT: TENDER YEARS, #7 Gemini St., Dona Vicenta Vill., D.C./Tel.
2244884
***
WHAT: Reading and Writing Enhancement Program for 3-7 yrs.
old.
This program helps a child to read and write using more of one2019s senses, including the use of touch and movement.
This will give the child2019s brain tactile and kinesthetic memories to hold on to, as well as visual and auditory ones.
SCHEDULE: Batch 1: April 4-15; Batch 2: April 18-29, 2016; 10 sessions 
FEE: P3,000 
CONTACT: TENDER YEARS, #7 Gemini St., Dona Vicenta Vill., D.C./Tel.
2244884
***
WHAT: Handwriting Without Tears 
DATE: April 18-May 20, 2016; 1 hour per session.
FEE:  Available upon request
WHAT: Multisensory Reading and Math
DATE/FEE/SKED: Available upon request
CONTACT: CENTER FOR BRIGHTER BEGINNINGS, Road 7, Do\xf1a Vicenta Village, D.C./Tel.
2242188 
***
WHAT: Summer Enrichment Classes offering: Elementary Mathematics, Elementary Algebra, Intermediate Algebra, Advanced Algebra, Geometry, Trigonometry, and Advanced Training for MTAP Quizzers
SCHEDULE: Enrolment starts on March 30-April 5 from 9 a.m.-1 p.m.
Classes start on April 6 and will end on April 29, 2016.
Grades 1-3 ; Grades 4-6 ; and Grades 7-11 
FEE: P2,500.
Enrolment is going on 
CONTACT: RIGID MATH-CENTER FOR SINGAPOREAN MATHEMATICS, Alzate St., Obrero, D.C.
Call Oscar Honorario at 3534464/7384039
***
Sports
COURSE: Combat 360 Dojo JKA Karate/Mix Martial Arts for Kids and Adults
Come to their open house for free classes on March 30, 2016
SCHEDULE AND FEE: Available upon request
CONTACT: COMBAT 360 DOJO, NAV1 Building, 900 Vinzon St., Agdao, Davao City .
E-mail: combat360dojo@gmail.com; Website: www.combat360dojo.com; Mobile: 9728048    
***
WHAT: Pulumbarit Badminton Club Kids Summer Clinic 
SCHEDULE: Batch 1: April 4-15; Batch 2: April 18-29; Batch 3: May 2-13; and Batch 4: May 16-27, 2016; 1 p.m.
to 3:00 p.m.
 10-day session per batch
FEE: P1,500 inclusive of training fee, court fee, and souvenir PBC shirt
VENUE: HOLIDAY GYM & SPA, F.
Torres St., D.C.
CONTACT: Coach Leo Pulumbarit 5560120
***
WHAT: Swim and Survive
SCHEDULE: April 4-8; April 11-15; April 18-22; April 25-29; May 2-6, May 9-13, May 16-20, May 22-27, 2016; 1 course is 5 days, Mon-Fri; Max.
of 2 hours per session
AGE GROUP: 5 to 8 years old; 9 to 12 years old; 13 years old and up 
FEE: Available upon request
VENUE: South side-Skyline Poolside, Catalunan Grande; and North side-Mamay Resort, Mamay  Road, Lanang
CONTACT: IPE ALINO,  
***
WHAT: Basic Swimming Course
FEE: P3,500 
COURSE: Advanced Swimming Course
FEE: P4,500 
SCHEDULE: Kids - Monday to Friday 8 a.m.
to 9 a.m./3 p.m.
to 4 p.m.; 4:30 p.m.
to 5:30 p.m.; Adults-Monday to Friday 6:30 a.m.
to 7:30am/6 p.m.
to 8 p.m.

CONTACT:  HOLIDAY GYM AND SPA, F.
Torres St., DC/Tel.
2223041/2223594; 7560559
***
WHAT: Taekwondo Summer Clinic under Ryan Cordero
SCHEDULE: Starts April 4, 2016.
MWF, 10:30 a.m.
to 12 p.m.
FEE: P2,000 monthly fee 
CONTACT: HOLIDAY GYM AND SPA, F.
Torres St., DC/Tel.
2223041/2223594; 7560559
***
COURSE: Martial Arts for children 
DATE: April 4-May 21, 2016
WHAT: Muay Thai for kids ages 4-8 years old and teens
SCHEDULE: TThSun, 9 a.m.
to 10:30 a.m.
or 2 p.m.
to 3:30 p.m.
FEE: P2,900 reg.
fee; P600 registration inclusive of uniform
WHAT: American Bushido for 9 years old and above
SCHEDULE: WF, 5:30 p.m.
to 7 p.m.; Sat, 9 a.m.
to 10:30 a.m.
FEE: P1,200 per month; P600 annual renewal fee
WHAT: Little Warrior for 4-8 years old
SCHEDULE: Sat, 1030 a.m.
to 12 p.m.
FEE: P1,500 monthly; P600 annual renewal fee
CONTACT: METRO LIFESTYLE, F.
Torres St., D.C./Tel.
2286182
***
WHAT: Davao City Red Cross2019 Learn to Swim Program for 5 yrs.
old and above                                
COURSES: Water Introduction, Water Exploration, Primary Skills and Stroke Readiness
SCHEDULE: April 4, 2016 to June 3, 2016 /Mon-Fri/8 a.m.
to 10 a.m./3 p.m.
to 5 p.m.
or 6 p.m.
to 8 p.m.

VENUE: La Piscine, Palm Village, Bo.
Obrero, D.C./Garden Oases, Porras St., Bo.
Obrero; Forest Hill Garden Resort, Balusong, Diversion Road; and Royal Mandaya Hotel, J.Palma Gil St., D.C.
FEE: P900 
CONTACT: DAVAO CITY RED CROSS, M.
Roxas Ave., D.C./Tel.
2276650/3211282
***
WHAT: Summer Learn to Swim Program for 6 years old and above                                 
SCHEDULE: Batch 1 - March 14-26; Batch 2 - March 28-April 8; Batch 3-April 11-April 22; Batch 4 - April 25-May 6; Batch 5-May 9- May 20; Batch 6- May 23-June 3, 2016 for basic lessons; 2 p.m.
to 3 p.m.
and 3 p.m.
to 4 p.m.
for advanced lessons
FEE: P3,500 ; P3,700 ; P3,900 .
Inclusive of 10 meetings; pool fee; and use of kickboard
VENUE: Brokenshire Resort, Madapo Hills, D.C.
CONTACT: BLUE MARLINS SWIMMING CLUB INTERNATIONAL/Annabelle 7960685
E-mail the author at mom.about.town.dvo@gmail.com.
Visit www.momabouttowndavao.blogspot.com.
Kisame: Vision of Heaven on Earth , Kisame: Vision of Heaven on Earth 
Contributed photo
Stephanie Mae M.
Tujan, Celebdom, AS I LOOK up at the ceiling paintings, several thoughts crossed my mind about the beautiful paintings photographed above me.
There2019s always a strange feeling, a mix of expectations, recognition and, in some cases, an experience one had never imagined.

It is fascinating to see how the lives of Christ, the Virgin Mary, and the saints have inspired artists for centuries.
It is amazing to see these artists visualize them.
It is like stepping into a real museum where sacred art is exhibited.
You can stare at these paintings for a long time without getting bored.
Ayala Museum, the Filipino Heritage Festival, and Abreeza Mall present 201cKISAME: Visions of Heaven on Earth, 201cAn Exhibition of Photographs of Ceiling Paintings from Churches in the Province of Bohol,201d which already started last March 5 and slated to run until March 31 at the Abreeza Mall2019s ground floor expansion wing.
201cKISAME: Visions of Heaven on Earth201d showcases the Filipino2019s artistic heritage in the context of ecclesiastical art.

Featuring installations of large format photographs and video documentation of architectural paintings selected from 17 churches in Bohol, the exhibition is an up-close view of images that represent visions of heaven on earth.

It also features the historical background of each painting and the church to which it belongs in a somewhat Visita Iglesia Bohol presentation in photographs.

The photographs featured in this exhibition were taken by Honorable Executive Secretary Paquito N.
Ochoa, Jr., from the ceiling paintings of the churches in Bohol in the dioceses of Tagbilaran and Talibon in April 17 to 21, 2008.

These selected works of art that adorn the parish churches are the remaining works of two pioneering Cebuano artists, Raymundo Francia and Canuto Avila, who were executed during the first half of the 20th century.

The exhibition2019s curators are Fr.
Milan Ted Torralba and Kenneth Esguerra.
Fr.
Milan Ted Torralba was the Assistant Secretary at the Apostolic Nunciature  in Manila and the present Vice President of External Affairs of the Visayan Association of Museums and Galleries, the Executive Secretary of the Permanent Committee for the Cultural Heritage of the Church, Catholic Bishops Conference of the Philippines, and the Corporate Secretary of the Bohol Heritage Development Foundation.

Meanwhile, Kenneth Esguerra is presently the Senior Curator and Head of Conservation of Ayala Museum, and has over two decades of working experience in museums both in the Philippines and abroad.

He was the Director for Exhibitions and concurrent Chief Registrar of the Metropolitan Museum of Manila , has taught Curatorship and Collections Management under the Philippine Arts Program of the University of the Philippines-Manila , and was the managing director of the Balay Taliambong: The Cojuangco Museum and Art Center .
201cKISAME: Visions of Heaven on Earth201d was first presented as part of the 2008 National Heritage Month celebration organized annually by the Filipino Heritage Festival.
It was first exhibited at the ground floor Gallery of Ayala Museum from May 27 to July 20, 2008.
*****
Feel Free to email stephaniesunstar@yahoo.com for comments and suggestions.
Or visit and add Celebdom Sunstar Davao for previous Celebdom articles.
Hope to hear from you soon.
The nurse is now a policeman , The nurse is now a policeman 
Michael A.
Plarisan.

Jeepy P.
Compio, THIS is all about a former nurse who chose to become a policeman and decided to use his medical skills instead directly in the police force where accidents and other life-threatening situations are most often dealt with.
More people are deciding to go into the medical field with the knowledge that nurses make lots of money especially when one opts to work abroad,
but not with Police Officer 1  Michael A.
Plarisan, a registered nurse  who boldly embarked in a different path by taking an examination for police position even after his experience as a staff nurse at the Davao Medical School Foundation Inc.
in Davao City.
A wider scope to help people, this is what Plarisan revealed in an interview when asked why he has chosen another path.
"The police operations even have a wider scope because you can immediately render medical assistance to the people especially when there is an accident through first aid," Plarisan said.
"You also get to encounter a lot of people in different situations through police work just like in a nursing profession," he added in the vernacular.
Plarisan spent his elementary years at Lanao Central Elementary School and finished his secondary education at Kidapawan City National High School in 2002.
From 2003 to 2007, Plarisan took a degree in Bachelor of Science in Nursing at North Valley College Foundation Inc.
in Kidapawan City.
Plarisan is the second of three children of Ranulfo and Elpidia who is a retired Research Specialist 2 at the Department of Environment and Natural Resources  in Kidapawan City.
The unanticipated Middle East meltdown and the global economic risk it brought that sent lots of nurses back to their homelands had been a turning point of Plarisan's career which had been instrumental to his desire to become a policeman.

"That time daghan ang gipang-pull out nga mga nurses nga nag-work sa abroad, so sa akong tan-aw, mora'g naluya na ang mga nurses.
Naisip nako while nag-duty nako sa DMSF nga mosulod na lang ko sa training sa PNP kay makatabang lang gihapon ta sa katawhan," he added.
Plarisan took a Police Officer and Senior Police Officer Examinations and passed.
He eventually joined training for Police Officer 1 and is now currently assigned as the desk officer  at the Davao City Police Office's Sta.
Ana Police Station.
He recalled his experience in the training which he described as challenging and narrated that there was a point where his socks earned holes after times spent in combat.
"I've been through a lot of experience during the training but I had never quit until the time came when I took the Police Officer and Senior Police Officer Examinations which I fortunately passed," he narrated.
"The training at the center was tough and there, I was able to reflect that my life had turned 360," Plarisan said adding that the training had changed him into a better version of himself.
After the training, he was downloaded in the Regional Public Safety Battalion  where he was assigned to the Davao International Airport and was later transferred to the Sta.
Ana Police Station for five-month training in station2019s atmosphere.
He also received appreciations and commendations such as letters and special commendations; leadership awards, and Medalya ng Papuri from different trainings and community relations, among others.
In 2014, he finished the Medical Aidman course in Regional Health Service 11; Emergency Medical Responder  in Central 911; Basic IV Therapy training, Tactical Medicine and Planning Workshop on Non-Communicable Disease Prevention and Control for Decision and Policy Makers in Department of Health -Davao.

Plarisan is now happily married to Dr.
May Anne Casta\xf1eda-Plarisan, one of Anesthesiologists in Southern Philippines Medical Center and they are blessed with a daughter, Mikhaela Andrea.

Rise of HIV-Aids positive 2018alarming2019 , Rise of HIV-Aids positive 2018alarming2019 Ivy C.
Tejano, HEALTH authorities are becoming alarmed by the continuous rise in the number of people with Human Immunodeficiency Virus-Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome  in the country.

"It's alarming.
Di na maganda ang bilang ng mga taong may ganitong HIV-Aids," DOH-Davao director Abdullah Dumama said, adding that HIV cases increased from month to month, and the age groups that have the highest number of cases are those in the productive age: between 25-34.

According to United Nations Joint Venture on Aids, the Philippines is one of only a handful of countries at risk of a full-blown Aids epidemic if it is unable to address the problem on time.

Indeed, HIV-Aids is a problem that everyone has to face and solve.

Dumama said the country is among the nine countries which has 28 percent increase in HIV cases.

He added that there are one case per one-hour and 15-minutes.

In Davao Region, he said, the office has recorded 36 cases as of January.

Based on the figures as of January 2016, there are 804 new cases of HIV-Aids in the country which is 50 percent higher as compared to December 2015 with 650 cases.

In January 2015, the health officials recorded 536 cases.
The figures also showed that 97 of the 100 percent persons living with Aids are male.
The median age was 28 years old .
More than half belong to the 25-34 year age group, while 28 percent were youth aged 15-24 years.

Regions with the highest number of reported cases for January 2016 were National Capital Region  with 370, Calbarzon with 130, Central Visayas with 71, Central Luzon with 60, and Davao Region with 36.
The 137 cases came from the rest of the country.

The reported modes of transmission  were sexual contact with 771 and needle sharing among injecting drug users  with 33.

Meanwhile, 89 percent of those transmitted are through sexual contact among males with males .

Same data showed that there has been a sudden increase of cases, from 17 reported cases per day in 2014 to 27 cases per day in 2016.

The DOH also said that nine out of 10 patients do not show symptoms, and are males.
From January 1984 to 2016, there were 31,160 HIV cases nationwide with 1,594 deaths.
 
Of the reported deaths, 13 were children below 10 years old and 16 were adolescents aged 10-19 years old.
Almost half or 744 belong to 25-34 year age group, 481 were in 35-49 year age group, and 210 were youth aged 15-24 years.
    
According to the World Health Organization , the HIV is a retrovirus that infects cells of the immune system, destroying or impairing their function.

As the infection progresses, the immune system becomes weaker, and the person becomes more susceptible to infections.
The most advanced stage of the HIV infection is the Aids.
It could take 10 to 15 years for an HIV-infected person to develop Aids.

Antiretroviral drugs can slow down the process even further.
WHO said HIV is transmitted through unprotected sexual intercourse , transfusion of contaminated blood, sharing of contaminated needles, and between a mother and her infant during pregnancy, childbirth and breastfeeding.

To address the growing number of HIV cases, the DOH earlier implemented the HIV-STI Prevention Program, which aims to reduce the transmission of the HIV and sexually transmitted infections among at-risk groups.
Rise of HIV-Aids positive 2018alarming2019
Ivy C.
Tejano
HEALTH authorities are becoming alarmed by the continuous rise in the number of people with Human Immunodeficiency Virus-Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome  in the country.

"It's alarming.
Di na maganda ang bilang ng mga taong may ganitong HIV-Aids," DOH-Davao director Abdullah Dumama said, adding that HIV cases increased from month to month, and the age groups that have the highest number of cases are those in the productive age: between 25-34.

According to United Nations Joint Venture on Aids, the Philippines is one of only a handful of countries at risk of a full-blown Aids epidemic if it is unable to address the problem on time.

Indeed, HIV-Aids is a problem that everyone has to face and solve.

Dumama said the country is among the nine countries which has 28 percent increase in HIV cases.

He added that there are one case per one-hour and 15-minutes.

In Davao Region, he said, the office has recorded 36 cases as of January.

Based on the figures as of January 2016, there are 804 new cases of HIV-Aids in the country which is 50 percent higher as compared to December 2015 with 650 cases.

In January 2015, the health officials recorded 536 cases.
The figures also showed that 97 of the 100 percent persons living with Aids are male.
The median age was 28 years old .
More than half belong to the 25-34 year age group, while 28 percent were youth aged 15-24 years.

Regions with the highest number of reported cases for January 2016 were National Capital Region  with 370, Calbarzon with 130, Central Visayas with 71, Central Luzon with 60, and Davao Region with 36.
The 137 cases came from the rest of the country.

The reported modes of transmission  were sexual contact with 771 and needle sharing among injecting drug users  with 33.

Meanwhile, 89 percent of those transmitted are through sexual contact among males with males .

Same data showed that there has been a sudden increase of cases, from 17 reported cases per day in 2014 to 27 cases per day in 2016.

The DOH also said that nine out of 10 patients do not show symptoms, and are males.
From January 1984 to 2016, there were 31,160 HIV cases nationwide with 1,594 deaths.
 
Of the reported deaths, 13 were children below 10 years old and 16 were adolescents aged 10-19 years old.
Almost half or 744 belong to 25-34 year age group, 481 were in 35-49 year age group, and 210 were youth aged 15-24 years.
    
According to the World Health Organization , the HIV is a retrovirus that infects cells of the immune system, destroying or impairing their function.

As the infection progresses, the immune system becomes weaker, and the person becomes more susceptible to infections.
The most advanced stage of the HIV infection is the Aids.
It could take 10 to 15 years for an HIV-infected person to develop Aids.

Antiretroviral drugs can slow down the process even further.
WHO said HIV is transmitted through unprotected sexual intercourse , transfusion of contaminated blood, sharing of contaminated needles, and between a mother and her infant during pregnancy, childbirth and breastfeeding.

To address the growing number of HIV cases, the DOH earlier implemented the HIV-STI Prevention Program, which aims to reduce the transmission of the HIV and sexually transmitted infections among at-risk groups.

Paid sex in the digital age   , Paid sex in the digital age   Karlo Paolo R.
Pates,   THE emergence of the technology and the Internet has indeed improved the society's means of communication.

From the original tradition of writing letters delivered to the post office for our loved ones to sending text messages though texts or video calls using different applications powered by the internet.

We may consider all of these developments as positive as the internet provides us a convenient way of communication but little did we know that the new and emerging platform has also been maximized by the prostitutes here in the city.
On the dark side of technology is the world2019s oldest 201cprofession201d.

Internet has revolutionized even prostitution.

Around the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas building, prostituted women and children start to trickle in as night time falls.
Each group has a pimp who negotiates for his or her group.
Most are in their late teens to their 20s, some students or the so-called tuition girls, and in the darker corners, the older ones.

She introduced herself as Ate Beng.
A pimp.
She said they even have a smartphone application for booking, that works much like a GrabTaxi application.

The prostituted person nearest the one booking will be sent based on the estimated cost.
In the app, the basic information about the prostituted person is available.

"Mas dali nalang na compared before na magtindog-tindog sa kilid sa Central Bank.
Maghulat pa og customers ," Ate Beng said.

There is even a similar application or gays and transgenders for the same function.

Ate Beng said the use of this new cellphone application paved way for more discrete transactions for her girls.

"Mao ng mapansin na karon dili na daghan kaayo ang makita sa Central Bank ," she added.

Michelle, a prostituted woman, says the smartphone application gives her more privacy and security as she no longer has to wait for long hours and be checked out personally by prospective customers on the streets.

This also keeps them away from the radar of authorities.
This is the disturbing side of it as Michelle, herself, attests that even minors are already hooking up through their phones.
Michelle already has two children and says she is just there to earn for her children2019s keep and still looks forward to leaving this trade.

Twenty-one-year-old Allysa is among the regulars in the area who is still not into the app as she says she finds if more enticing to wait for customers on the street.

"Usahay makatsamba pud ka og dako ang bayad ," Allysa added.

Like many prostituted in the city, Allysa is aware of sexually transmitted diseases and HIV-Aids and so she makes sure she gets a checkup regularly at the City Health Office.

She has a pink card, she says, this allows her free regular checkups for STDs.

"Of course, I personally ask my customers if they have been having sex with anyone else because it might be dangerous for us.
Even if we are prostituted, we don't want that to happen to us," Allysa said of her customers.

The privacy that technology gives to this illicit activity is fanning its popularity.

Andy, who works in one of the call centers here, said that sexual intercourse has become a form of past time of sort among them after long stretch of hours working.
Hiring prostituted persons, whether male or female, is the preferred way.

"It's like a no strings-attached kind of relationship among us call center agents," Andy said.

Online websites allow the prostituted to post all their basic information, sexy images, and even their contact information and address.
Foreigners have been identified as the frequent clients of online websites.

According to the study of the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV and Aids , sex workers are among the highest risk groups for HIV, although records would show that prostituted women who have pink cards and are thus known to the CHO have less cases of STFDs, maybe because they are more aware and are also known to the non-government organizations and peoples organizations who work with the prostituted in the city.

The cloak of secrecy surrounding the smartphone deals is the most troubling.
Put this side by side with the growing number of HIV-Aids cases in Davao City, authorities and NGO workers are seeing a looming problem.
The Human immunodeficiency virus  is a virus that gradually attacks the immune system, which our body's natural defense against illness.
There is no cure or treatment yet for HIV.
And if left untreated.
It can severely damage the person's immune system.

Aids which stands for acquired immune deficiency syndrome, on the other hand, is a syndrome caused by the HIV virus.

According to the data of UNAIDS, this is the last stage of HIV infection where the body can no longer defend itself and various diseases, and later on could result to death.

The number one cause of being affected or transmitted by the HIV virus, unprotected sex.

Having unprotected sex means that performing sexual intercourse without any protection such as condoms which is commonly practiced among sex workers.

In the Philippines, the Department of Health-Epidemiology Bureau recently released a data that shows there are 650 new HIV positive individuals in the country for December 2015.
The data is 28% higher compared to the same period in 2014 with 509 HIV positive individuals.

The regions with the highest number of reported cases for December were: National Capital Region with 250 , Calabarzon with 98 cases , Central Luzon with 62 cases , Davao Region with 54 cases , and 188 48% from the rest of the country.
Showcasing Davao City's rich resources  , Showcasing Davao City's rich resources  Ace June Rell S.
Perez, SPROUTING more and more exhibitors each year, Davao City's Farm and Agro Trade Fair, one of the highlights of the Araw ng Dabaw celebration, is indeed alive and growing.
More exhibitors are participating in this year2019s edition of the agro-trade fair, reaching 250 exhibitors as compared to last year2019s 230.
201cWe are growing each year and we are positive that we will continue this endeavor to keep the floriculture industry in the city alive,201d Maria Victoria C.
Jimenez, past and acting president of the Floriculture Industry of Davao Inc.
 said.
The fair, which opened last March 1 and will run until March 31 at SM City Grounds, is organized by the Mindanao Floriculture and Ecological Development Inc.
 and Fidi.
The fair is to showcase agricultural products not just entirely of the city but including the whole of the Mindanao.
During the fair, floriculturists and garden hobbyists can enjoy a wide discounts and sales in all agricultural plants such as plants, fruits, flowers, furniture, animals, pots, machineries, among others.
201cThis is also our contribution in boosting our tourism industry,201d Jimenez said adding that some of the exhibitors will remain in the trade fair until April as the industry2019s participation in the Visit Davao Fun Sale 2016.
The staging of the fair is in partnership with the Department of Tourism-Davao.
Jimenez said that during the Araw ng Dabaw celebration, most of their buyers are from the city and nearby cities including Tagum, Panabo, Cagayan De Oro, and more.
Throughout the years, since it was first staged in late 1980s, the city's Farm and Agro Trade Fair has turned a lot of buyers into exhibitors.
"The fair had already turned the life paths of most of its customers.
The buyers-before were encouraged and converted to be the exhibitors-of-now, 201cJimenez said.
Visit the month-long display of agricultural products offered by the bountiful and abundant city of Davao.

ICT industry in Davao on an upward trend, ICT industry in Davao on an upward trendAce June Rell S.
Perez, GROWING by leaps and bounds, the Information and Communication Technology  industry in Davao City will continue to take a big leap, providing economic development and generating employment in this part of the country.
With the recent rank bagged by the city for the year 2015 as the top 66th business process outsourcing  destination of the Top 100 in the world, Davao City2019s ICT industry is indeed moving on an upward trend.
Tholons, a services globalization and investment advisory firm, recognized Davao City anew as one of the biggest movers in its 2016 annual survey of the top 100 outsourcing destinations in the world, ranking 66th worldwide, some three places higher than last year's 69th place.
201cFor 2016 onward, we remain very confident and bullish about the industry as we continue to remain very active, to be able to jump for three ranks is really quite an achievement for Davao, being up a notch higher is very difficult to achieve because in the past three years we are ranked alternately 69th or 70th place,201d Samuel Matunog, president of the ICT-Davao Inc.
said.
He emphasized that the success of the multi-billion local ICT industry is a collaborative effort of various industry players including the BPO companies, Software industry and the mixed-used development property players which are all doing its efforts in attracting BPO locators.
201cAfter absorbing half of Philippine BPO demand in 2014 and the reported increase of  FTEs of over 33,000, the latest rise in Tholons ranking indicates that the multi-stakeholder approach in addressing the demands of the city2019s ICT industry continues to bear fruit,201d he said.
At present, the BPO Association of Davao, Inc  already reached over 35 members.
BPO ADI is an association of big multinational companies operating in the city and the small-medium homegrown BPO companies.
Also, the association of the Davao Software Industry has doubled its members this year to 40 members, an indication of development and expansion.
201cBPO in Davao has grown largely by leaps and bounds, we2019ve seen the coming of big companies such as Teleperformance, Convergeny2019s, Ibex, VXI and the newly-opened Excellence Global Solutions ,201d Xavier Eric Manalastas, president, CEO of Next BPO Solutions, a homegrown BPO firm and president of BPO ADI said.
The city2019s position as an ICT destination surpassing other cities of the member countries in the Brunei Darussalam, Indonesia, Malaysia Philippines East Asian Growth Area thus attracting more BPO locators is greatly attributed to the city2019s good business climate, typhoon-safe area, peace and order situation, cooperation of the local industry partners, and the availability of pool of talent that only need to be further developed.
The BPO sector generated some 34,000 jobs for Davao City by the end of 2015.
201cWith multimillion investments being poured by the BPO industry to the city through the construction and expansion of more BPO spaces, it opens the creation of more jobs in the service sector,201d Davao City Investment Promotions Center  officer-in-charge Ivan C.
Cortez earlier said.
The BPO sector, it was noted, that it started the year 2015 with 20,000 jobs and ended the year with some 70 percent growth to 34,000 jobs.
Cortez said that big part of the generated job is contributed by the voice call centers.
In 2014, the BPO sector registered $18.9 billion in total revenue and is forecasted to grow between 30 to 32 percent from 2015 onward.

The magnet of the south , The magnet of the south Ace June Rell S.
Perez, 
FAST-BECOMING a major Meetings, Incentives, Conventions, Exhibitions  destination in the country, Davao City for this year and beyond will continue to bring in more national and international conventions which will lead to the city2019s more vibrant and booming tourism industry.
The city's position as a preferred Mice destination is further strengthened as lineup of national and international conventions are already scheduled in the city this year until next year.
201cWith the major conventions, Davao is now one of the preferred destinations for Mice and this is a major driver for the growth of our tourism industry," Roberto Alabado III, Department of Tourism 11 director said adding that the city has now a conventional center to cater different events such as the SMX-Convention Center.
Having three function rooms and five meeting rooms, totaling 5,200 square meters of leasable space, SMX Davao can accommodate a total of 5,550 of audience.
The convention center is dubbed as the largest and first privately-owned and managed convention and exhibition center in the southern part of the Philippines.
The increasing awareness among national and international organizers of various meetings, incentives, conferences, and exhibitions  about Davao City resulted to the influx of visitors.
According to DOT data, of Davao Region's 1,874,587 tourist arrivals from January to September 2015, most of the tourists were reported in Davao City with 1,290,480 or 69 percent of the region's tourist arrivals.
"We can attribute the increasing tourist arrivals to the campaign of enabling Davao City as a Mice destination," Roberto P.
Alabado III said.
He added that a lot of the conventions that were not held here before were already staged in Davao City because convention centers in the city is capable of holding national and international conventions.
To further position Davao as a Mice destination, the tourism department will continue the Mice strategy.
DOT is planning to stage more Mice road shows which will be vital to introduce the city, emphasizing Davao's unique offering of Mice incentives to various organizers who intend to hold their conventions in the city.
As this early, Davao City Mice stakeholders are gearing up for some of the conventions that will be hosted here including the international convention dubbed as the Asian Raptor Conference on October 2017 which is projected to gather 200 foreign guests.
Other lined-up conventions and events are the UHS Essential Health Phils.
Inc.
Assembly on March 16, Philippine Association of Civil Registrars National Convention on April 5, Phil.
League of Government and Private Midwives 17th National Convention on April 20 and Daughters of Mary Immaculate International Conference on April 23 to 24, among others.
Just last month, the national convention of the Philippine Veterinarian Medical Association  was held in the city drawing some 1,500 participants from all over the country.
Lisette Marques, city tourism operations officer, for her part said that they are targeting a 10 percent increase in tourist arrivals in the city for this year.
201cWe are positive to attain this since last year there has been an increasing awareness among national and international organizers of Mice about Davao City which can really contribute to the influx of visitors,201d she said.
Also, the tourism department is now finalizing partnership from airlines partners to give Mice participants special fare discounts.
Indeed, Davao as a 201cmost-preferred201d Mice destination in the country has brighter prospects for 2016 onward.

Rodrigo Duterte: Will he be the next president?, Rodrigo Duterte: Will he be the next president?Ben O.
Tesiorna, RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE, mayor of Davao City for more than two decades -- will he make it this time as the 16th President of the Republic of the Philippines?
If you are to base on his Facebook supporters and the frequency of his name being mentioned in social media by millions of Filipinos all over the world, one could say that Duterte has a big chance of getting elected president in the May 2016 polls.
But as Duterte himself admitted, Facebook likes do not make one get the presidency.
Many would concur with this but at the same time admit that it cannot be denied how big the influence of social media is in this year's electoral race.
Some even touted that this just might be the first time that a president is elected because of the power of social media.
If so, then many Duterte supporters are already singing hallelujah this early.
According to Facebook, a total of 12 million people around the world participated in conversations about the Philippine elections from November 20, 2015 to March 8, 2016, resulting in more than 81 million interactions.
Out of over 49 million Facebook users in the country, more than 20 percent are 201cactively engaged and are sharing their opinions on key election issues."
In a Rappler report recently, it said that Duterte remains the most talked about presidential candidate.
Duterte peaked mid-November when he announced that he was running for president.

But the million dollar question however is, how will these queries and likes in the internet translate into votes for Duterte on May 9?
Peter Lavi\xf1a, Duterte spokesman, said that it is truly a big challenge for them how to convert online power to offline vote.

"We are currently running a campaign to register our supporters online through our websites so we will determine who are voters, who are not.
We are also employing the same via SMS.
We will not be able to do this 100 percent but we will have a fair idea by election day if we can mobilize the bulk of this online power," said Lavi\xf1a.
Huge attendance
Another indicator of a strong political campaign by Duterte is the huge attendance in all rallies of the mayor be it in Mindanao, Visayas or Luzon.
True even in areas known as bailiwick of other presidentiables.
Duterte also has the habit of paying courtesy call to incumbent officials in areas he visits whether they be political allies or not.
And more often than not, the incumbents would also welcome the mayor to their turf and give him a warm welcome.
As they say, politics is a game of addition.
Duterte has also been receiving endorsements from organizations and personalities left and right.

Latest to endorse him were former President Fidel V.
Ramos, Moro National Liberation Front chair Nur Misuari, singer actress Aiza Seguerra and many more.
Moro Islamic Liberation Front vice chair Ghadzali Jaafar also addressed Duterte as "mayor and president" during his visit to the MILF's Camp Darapanan in Sultan Kudarat, Maguindanao.
Joma Sison of the Communist Party of the Philippines has also expressed his preference for Duterte as the next president over other candidates.

Surveys
Even in various surveys conducted by different groups, Duterte is also in the running for the top position.
In Mindanao, the mayor is the overwhelming choice with an average of 59 percent of total votes with Davao Region registering the highest points of 81 percent.

Duterte also leads in the National Capital Region , Southern Luzon/Bicol, and the Visayas, based on January survey conducted by Rappler.

Even in regions where Duterte is not on the top spot, he still managed to come in close to the top.
In North and Central Luzon for example where Vice President Jejomar Binay leads with 25 percent, Duterte comes close in second place with 23 percent, while Grace Poe got 20 percent.

So what will ultimately make Davao City Mayor Rodrigo Duterte the next president? Of course, it would still be his platform of governance.
Duterte has so far focused on these five-point agenda.

1.
Stamping out criminality particularly illegal drugs, kidnapping, and other heinous crimes; instilling discipline for everyone to adhere to the rule of law, and strengthening the country's justice system;
2.
Raising living standards by generating jobs, increasing employment, doing away with contractualization, promoting livelihood, agricultural modernization, entrepreneurial, technological and industrial advancement with just taxation and equitable distribution of wealth while caring for the environment for sustainable development;
3.
Intensifying and improving social services including education, health, housing, mass transportation with special attention to the elderly, women, children, youth, indigenous peoples and other marginalized sectors; providing assistance to overseas Filipino workers and their families; adapting to climate change, reducing risk, preparing for natural disasters and adopting 911 nationwide;
4.
Ending internal conflict and building peace for all Filipinos regardless of religion or political ideologies so we may all be united in confronting the threats of violent extremism, defending our territorial sovereignty, integrating well within the Asean region and helping promote international peace, understanding, friendship and cooperation.
5.
Shifting to a Federal-Parliamentary System through a Constitutional Convention, holding of plebiscite and preparing the various States to effect power-sharing, resources-sharing, respect-for-all and development-for-all as key to reforming the whole bureaucracy to effect good governance, including increasing the salaries of government workers, fighting graft & corruption and unleashing the potentials of all regions, of all ethnic groups for well rounded social, economic and cultural growth.
And so far, at the rate Duterte's campaign is going, his chances is increasing by the day.
As Lavi\xf1a puts it, they "are happy of the results of this survey, which we think mirror what is really happening on the ground."
"We believe this is reflective of the pulse of the communities and the preference of the Filipino people.
The high increase by Duterte, noticeably the only among the bets, is more reflective of what we are seeing as we visit communities, talk to volunteers, meet with support groups and sectors, consult with local leaders and supporters across the country," he said.

Lavi\xf1a said that Duterte's sorties consistently draw unprecedented crowds attracted not by free food, free rides, or the presence of showbiz personalities and entertainers.
He said it is a proof of the increasing approval of Mayor Duterte's bid for the presidency and the trust and confidence of the Filipinos on his agenda for real change.

"We are glad that people see the genuineness of Duterte's vision for the Filipinos and the Philippines," Lavi\xf1a said.
Tracking behaviors for better understanding , Tracking behaviors for better understanding Karina V.
Canedo, WHILE Davao city has maintained 5-5.5 percent from 2011-2015 Human Immunodeficiency Virus  prevalence rate, officials overseeing the implementation of policies and programs for the virus are still not complacent.

Dr.
Jordana Ramittere, Head of the Reproductive Health and Wellness in an interview with Sun.Star Davao, said that in 2015 prevalence of condom use has increased 5.4 percent.

But a greater number still prefer no barriers.

201cIt is very volatile, because if we slip it will really rise, there is continued rise of cases in the whole Philippines, so we still have to aggressively implement prevention and access to services,201d Ramiterre said.

She added that intensified information drive, awareness education, and early testing are being promoted in Davao.

Based on Philippine HIV and AIDS registry in the Epidemiology Bureau, in Davao City there are 42 cases recorded in December 2015, while there are 332 persons living with HIV-Aids recorded from January to December 2015.

Out of 42 recorded cases in December 2015, 40 were male and 2 were female.

In the whole year 2015, 319 males and 13 females were recorded positive.

The 25-34 age group has recorded the most number of cases with for the whole year of 2015 and the Homosexuals recorded highest in the mode of transmission with 172 cases followed by bisexuals with 21 cases for the whole year.

Ramittere said that the numbers alone are alarming, but it could also indicate increased awareness among a wider population base such that more are asking to be tested.

What bothers them now is the high prevalence among men having sex with men or MSMs, and thus they are focusing their Integrated HIV Behaviorial Serologic Surveillance , done every two years on this sector to better understand the sector and their vulnerabilities.

201cWe have not yet done survey in other key populations like freelance or registered entertainers, maybe in the next round because in the past IHBSS  it is always low sa Davao City.

We focus doon sa MSM, kasi ang current driver natin ng epidemic is ang MSM,201d Ramiterre said.
 
She said that to determine right respondents of the surveillance, the team from RHWC conducted site mapping in four weeks to find out the cruising sites of the MSMs, areas where they congregate, and hang out.

All throughout the six month survey, she said, strict confidentiality is followed.
"Just like population hindi mo na man masasabi na andito lang sila.
They are present in all walks of life even among professional groups,201d Ramiterre said.

She added that their MSM peer educators also tried to map the city and look into different districts for representation.

In addition, Ramiterre said that they are keeping track of the MSMs every two years because unlike the freelance sex workers, and registered entertainers who are territorial, MSMs are mobile and do frequently change areas of concentration.

She said that IHBSS results will be used for planning strategies programs for the HIV not the RHWC but also for the Davao City Aids Council .

201cSa surveillance all about tinitingnan dito ang demographics, level of education and awareness access to services ngmga respondents at the same time meron kasing serologic studies dito.
They are screened for HIV, Syphilis and Hepatitis B.,201d Ramittere said.

The latest IHBSS was participated by around 300 respondents in a surveillance span of six months.

According to Ms.
Priscilla Senoc of the Davao City AIDS Council, the lead council which monitors and evaluates programs for HIV, as well as a coordinative body of all 19 national and local agencies, they are now trying to approve workplace policy to make seminar on STI-HIV AIDS before they can get business permit.

201cData of HIV in Davao City is rising.
We are now trying to approve the workplace policy because supposedly in the ordinance, all establishments should undergo HIV-AIDS seminar.
We have not yet ironed out kung paano siya mai-implement," Senoc said.

Senoc said that the said seminar must be done for one day as it should include seminar for gender and sexuality.

"Ang program hindilang focus sa HIV and AIDS we really have to let them understand the LGBT issue and gender and sexuality paraatleast may reduction ng stigma," Senoc said.

She also said that part of their achievement is successful lobbying of establishment of Barangay AIDS Ordinance among barangays and as of the moment they are now providing technical support on Barangay Calinan, first barangay to have the said ordinance.

She said that on the quarterly meeting of the Council this coming May, she will emphasize to DepEd the growing number of young people's early exposure to sex.

"A meeting should also be called with the Parents and Teacher's Association to remind them about the vulnerabilities of the youth especially in HIV-AIDS infection."
Senoc believes that more than the health, HIV is an offshoot of multi-faceted factors.

"It comes with the physical structure- a community stigmatizing HIV, and other economic and political factors especially as it also includes the issue of poverty," Senoc said.

She also said that the limited national budget for reproductive health pose a big risk for HIV victims as in the long run, as possible shortage of Anti-retroviral drugs, medicine that prevents the HIV into a full blown virus, ,may happen as the number of cases increase.

She said that there is a moot chance for those HIV victims even to air this kind of concern to the government as most of them refuse to come out in the open and campaign for a big budget for medicine for HIV.

She also said that biases must really be set aside to let people feel that they have right access of government services, especially with the HIV victims.

Senoc said that as Health Education Promotion Officer II of the RHWC, the secretariat of Davao city AIDS council, she's been invited in any places to talk about HIV, and apart from the information dissemination through peer education done also in aid of Department of Health, they are also in partnership with Population Division of CHO to intensify info drive against HIV.

Promiscuity, technology  , Promiscuity, technology  Christine Joice C.
Cudis, INSTANT connections with websites and apps that are designed especially for what you are seeking for is likewise enticing even the young to link up for paid sex and earn easy money.
Such new trade is enticing even boys and young men as they no longer have to parade themselves and can just link up with whoever is seeking their so-called service.

In an interview with Talikala Inc.
executive director Jeanette Ampog, she said that this can be behind the emerging sexual activities of these "service boys.201d
201cPresent talaga yang ganyang uri ng kalakaran dito sa Davao.
Young boys who are in a tight financial situation usually falls prey to this.
Since malaki rin ang perang nakukuha through this, maraming nae-enganyo ng maging service boys," she said.

Talikala Inc.
is a non-government organization that has been working with prostituted women and children since 1987 in Davao City.

She also explained that these teenage boys go for as many partners a night to earn more.

In a recent report forwarded by the Philippine HIV and AIDS Registry Epidemiology Bureau, from January to December 2015, Davao City has recorded 332 more people living with HIV , 293 of it were Asymptomatic cases while 39 were confirmed with AIDS.

The data showed that there are more men than women with HIV-Aids: 319 men with reported cases of HIV/AIDS in 2015 as against only 13 females.

A study from Brown University revealed that dating sites and applications are one of the leading causes of HIV/AIDS today.

Top on the list are Grindr, Manhunt, Scruff, Adam4Adam, and Craigslist.
 
Alias Jeffrey, a Dabawenyo who is an active user of these sites, confessed that he already hooked up with more guys through the dating app compared to when he was not an active Grindr user yet.

201cIt is much easier to find someone to engage in sexual intercourse with through these online sites/apps.
Sa app kasi, lahat ng tao doon expected mo na na interested to have sex, pipili ka na lang kung sino yung gusto mo sa lahat,201d he said.

Merely chatting already adds to the anticipation of the encounter, he said.

201cThe mystery adds to my excitement.
Dun parang nabi-build up yung sexual tension,201d he explained.
Building up as well are the numbers of HIV-Aids cases of men having sex with men or MSMs.

In the 2015 data, highest transmission means if through homosexual intercourse with 172.
Bisexual engagements or having sex with both male and female numbered to 121, while heterosexual sex resulted to 39 cases.

However, Ampog, made it clear that "the highest contributing cause of HIV/AIDS would still be the practice of unprotected sex.
This is why we have been intensifying our programs related with proper education and information dissemination of the matter."  
Talikala.
Inc.
and the local government has been conducting a community to community prevention education.

The Reproductive Health and Wellness Center  here in Davao receives several requests from workplaces and the academe for brief lectures on health education with priority on HIV/AIDS awareness.

"Prevention will always be the best thing to do when it comes to the topic of HIV-Aids, especially because we know that a treatment for the disease does not exist yet," head of RHWC Dr.
Jordana Ramiterre said in an interview.

RHWC targets to educate the residents of Davao with the basic knowledge on HIV-Aids.
It includes, teaching them the sexual behaviors with high-risk of getting infected with the disease to make them fully aware of the drastic changes if a person would be declared positive with HIV-Aids.
Public information is the city's biggest and most effective way to curb the rising number of people who are living with the disease.

Ramiterre also remarked that the high number of people in the record is only because of the city's successful implementation of prevention education program.

"More people get themselves tested of course because they have seen that the city is sincere in helping them with their situation and also we keep the information in utmost confidence," she added.

Those working with reproductive health issues, however, are one in saying that the greatest hindrance to safe sex is the belief that HIV-Aids cannot possibly infect them.
Many have been proven wrong, too late.
Paper and its many pleasures, Paper and its many pleasures
Stephanie Tudtud
Deneb R.
Batucan, Stephanie Tudtud finds bliss in turning paper into pieces of art
, AS much as we aspire to pursue our career goals, it2019s never wrong to have time dedicated only for oneself.
Career goals are important and all, but for Stephanie Tudtud, it is just as important to have an outlet to express one2019s self in any form of art.
Ever since she was little, Stephanie has always been into art.
201cI think my parents always saw the artist in me.
They would bring home tons of scratch papers from their office so I could draw on them using pencils, crayons and colored pens.
You could say that those were my first media,201d she shared.
Read more on Sun.Star Weekend.

Nike unveils its first self-lacing sneaker, Nike unveils its first self-lacing sneaker
AMERICA.
An image of the Nike HyperAdapt 1.0 is projected on a screen as Nike CEO Mark Parker speaks during a news conference, Wednesday, March 16, 2016, in New York.

NEW YORK -- Forget about slipping out of your shoes because of loose laces or feeling pressure from too-tight tying when doing those sprints.
Nike Inc.
has unveiled its first power-lacing sneaker 2014 it allows users to make the fit looser or snugger on the fly by pressing buttons on the side of the shoe.
The world's largest sportswear brand, based in Beaverton, Oregon, unveiled the sneaker along with a host of other innovations Wednesday at a media event in New York.
The innovations come as Nike is digging deeper into personalized products and services, while focusing on reaching a goal of posting $50 billion in annual revenue by the end of its fiscal 2020 year.
It reported $30.6 billion in revenue for its latest fiscal year that ended in May.
Other innovations Nike highlighted include "anti-clog traction," which uses technology that prevents mud from sticking to the soles of soccer cleats.
Nike also unveiled a new Nike Plus app, an all-access pass for athletes.
The app, available in June, connects to its suite of apps that include running and training aids and provides access to Nike experts.
"We've entered a new era of personalized performance," said Mark Parker, Nike's president and CEO.
"Today, athletes want more than just a dash board.
They want a relationship."
Nike said that the potential for shoes with adaptive lacing is huge because it provides tailored-to-the-moment custom fit.
When users step into the shoe, their heel will hit a sensor.
The athlete then can press two buttons on the side that adjust the grip.
But Nike said that in the future, it won't be manual.
The sensor could sense when the user needs to have the shoe tighter or looser.
The self-lacing sneaker, which is called "Nike HyperAdapt 1.0," will be out starting the holiday season and will only be available for members of its loyalty Nike+ app.
It will be available in three colors.
The price was not revealed.
"The adaptive lacing system is an excellent first step towards truly adaptive personalized footwear," said Matt Powell, sports industry analyst at NPD Group Inc., a market research firm.

The Don Bosco Academy-Pampanga Alumni Homecoming 2016: Memories, bonds and the many firsts, The Don Bosco Academy-Pampanga Alumni Homecoming 2016: Memories, bonds and the many firstsBOSCONIANS are not only known for molding great leaders and prominent men locally and internationally, but are also respected for making historical firsts, the Salesian way.
Thus was the case during the Don Bosco Academy-Pampanga2019s grand alumni homecoming held at its former site in Cabalantian, Bacolor town over the weekend, were more than 700 alumni from different batches---led by host Silver Jubilarians Batch 201891 and honorees Golden Jubilarians Batch 201966---returned home to rekindle memories, strengthen bonds and importantly, mark the hugely successful gathering with many firsts and historic highlights.
201cIt was a hair-rising sight to behold that more than 700 Bosconians gathered at the old site of the academy and returned home to Don Bosco after 20 years.
It was, so to speak, a first in its history since it coincided with the 60th anniversary of Don Bosco-Pampanga,201d shared Batch 912019s Alfie Adriano, who co-organized the homecoming with batchmates Ellcid Adriano, Landlee Quiwa, Ian Torno and Palermo Bucho, Jr.
Adriano disclosed that it was also the first time 11 Salesian priests concelebrated the Holy Mass, complete with a re-enactment of evening prayers and ringing of bells upon entering the gymnasium.
201cThen Fr.
Catechist Fr.
Ditto Gueco and Principal Fr.
Joey Paras were there and so was Fr.
Rector Rolo Alcasid, who, for the first time, attended a homecoming as he does not usually attend reunions.
It added more meaning to the homecoming and brought a lot of memories back, like our evening prayers before dismissal time or the ringing of a bell before we take exams or have activities at the gym,201d said Adriano.
201cAlso, the attendance of our honorees, the Batch 201966 Golden Jubilarians, was an all time high as about 21 of them were there for the homecoming.
It was such a momentous reunion highlighted by tributes and prayers for the canonization of Fr.
Braga which was led by Fr.
Nestie Impelido, and of course, the strengthening of bonds, retelling of stories and Bosconians of old revisiting the old site.
It was nostalgic, jubilant and simply great!201d added Adriano.
Pampanga Premier Cars BMW supports PRO-32019s 2018Ride against Crime2019 drive, Pampanga Premier Cars BMW supports PRO-32019s 2018Ride against Crime2019 drivePAMPANGA Premier Cars BMW  supported the Police Regional Office III 2019s newest anti-criminality campaign dubbed 201cRide against Crime201d which was launched recently.
PPC BMW Aftersales Manager Albert Co Beng and  BMW Motorrad Sales Executive Antonio Dungca  graced the campaign launch and personally handed over a BMW token to PRO-3 Acting Director Chief Superintendent Rudy G.
Lacadin.

Some 2,000 motorcycle enthusiasts, mostly members of various riders organizations in Central Luzon and Metro Manila, joined the initial ride against crime, considered the biggest gathering of motor bikers in one setting at Camp Olivas, City of San Fernando,Pampanga.
Lacadin said 201cRide against Crime201d is part of the anti-crime awareness program of PRO-3, whose kick-off coincided with the launching of "Krimen I-text mo, Aksyonan Ko", a strategy aimed at neutralizing criminals.
"For every piece of information relayed to authorities that yields positive results, the informant is entitled to a cash reward," said Lacadin, adding that the scheme has been proven effective especially in combating lawless elements.
He said tipsters will receive monetary rewards "depending how valuable the information is."
This scheme is a 24/7 feedback mechanism that calls for the active involvement of communities, media and local government units in Central Luzon.
The ride against crime motorcade, Lacadin said, constitutes "a sort of show of force" by various motorcycle clubs, which the police consider as effective "force multipliers" in maintaining public safety.
"We value the potential of the riders in our anti-crime strategy, this is a big help for us," Lacadin pointed out, as he expressed thanks to participants and sponsors of the event.
"As we ride for a cause, I enjoin everyone to actively participate in our campaign against all forms of criminality," he added.
After a brief orientation on riders2019 safety, Lacadin and the riders hit the road heading to Olongapo City where they held a "boodle fight" at a resort there.

From Martial Law to People Power: Experiential Museum recreates a nation2019s journey, From Martial Law to People Power: Experiential Museum recreates a nation2019s journey
Contributed photo
ON APRIL 24, 1980, Macli-ing Dulag, village elder of Bugnay in Kalinga, was murdered.
Dulag had been leading protests against a plan by the Marcos regime to construct a dam, which would bring about the displacement of indigenous communities.
His life and struggle to defend their sacred lands, however, would be ended by bullets fired by soldiers of the Dictatorship.
Still, decades after his passing, Dulag's legacy of courageous resilience endures as his story is passed on by his neighbors.
It is a story that is told to young members of their tribe, and it continues to inspire the indigenous peoples of Kalinga.
It is a story that will now be conveyed and retold through new forms of media in the People Power Experiential Museum.

The Edsa People Power Commission  will be opening from February 25 to 26, 2016 at Grandstand of Camp Aguinaldo, Quezon City, a museum that will allow visitors to experience critical moments in history such as the fear and oppression wrought by Martial Law, the struggle to reclaim democracy, and the four miraculous days of People Power.

With the creation of the Experiential Museum, the EPPC hopes to share with young Filipinos the stories of those who bravely endured and fought against the injustice and oppression of Martial Law.
Actors will portray Filipinos who were martyred during Martial Law, including Dulag, Edgar Jopson, and Evelio Javier.
Visitors will be guided through several halls, which bring together elements of theater, cinema, photography, and other allied arts to recreate the experiences that awakened Filipinos, and sparked the Edsa People Power Revolution.
Each hall will represent not only periods in history, but also themes that underscore the enduring narrative of Martial Law and the 1986 Edsa Revolution:
1.
The Hall of Restless Sleep
The first hall represents the lulling of our nation to sleep by Martial Law and the suppression of our freedoms.
Visitors will enter a hall with bound people, sleeping on army cots.
On the walls, the announcement of former President Ferdinand Marcos, declaring the imposition of Martial is repeatedly shown.
The visitors will notice that some cots are empty.
 But when they look at those cots, they will see mirrors reflecting their own faces.
  
2.
The Hall of Hidden Truths
The second hall is a masque ball, where the privileged few of the "New Society" revel in exorbitant festivities.
But outside the ball, beggars roam while photographs documenting the poverty and social inequity during the Martial Law are era are shown on the walls.
An operatic version of "Dahil sa Iyo" is played repeatedly.3.
The Hall of Orphans
In the third hall, you will meet the orphans of Filipinos who were abducted, tortured, and "forcibly disappeared" by the Marcos regime.
They ask you: "Where are our parents?"
4.
The Hall of the Lost
In the fourth hall, the old propaganda films of the Marcos dictatorship will be projected on the walls.
But after this, you will encounter the injustices hidden by Martial Law propaganda.
 This hall will provide visitors with photographs and stories of the desaparecidos of that dark time.
5.
Hall of Pain
Be prepared to learn about Martial Law's brutal ways of torture.
6.
The Hall of Forgotten Martyrs
In the sixth hall, visitors will meet the forgotten martyrs who represent the different sectors of their generation.
Lean Alejandro , Macli-ing Dulag , and Evelio Javier  will share their stories with you.
 
7.
The Hall of Awakening
From the tarmac stained with Ninoy Aquino's blood to streets teeming with Filipinos praying for the end of the Marcos Regime -- you will re-experience the breathtaking journey of the Edsa People Power Revolution.

8.
The Hall of Action
In the last hall, you will find memorabilia and symbols from the Edsa People Power Revolution.
Do these symbols still mean anything to you? What would you do if, like the Filipinos who experienced Martial Law and People Power, you are also called to sacrifice and defend our country's future? May you be surprised by your own response.

For more information or to register for a tour, please visit edsapeoplepower.com
XU Health Services, Red Cross Youth hold medical mission, XU Health Services, Red Cross Youth hold medical mission
 CAGAYAN DE ORO.
Using a stethoscope, one of the volunteer doctors examines the breathing pattern of a senior citizen during the XU medical mission in Talongan Village.

THE joint medical mission of Xavier University2019s Health Services Office  and Red Cross Youth served the residents of Talongan Village, a relocation site in Sitio Calaanan, on Sunday, October 18.
The event, dubbed as 201cSaving Lives: One Community at a Time,201d provided free medical consultations, medicines, tooth extraction, health lectures and included a feeding program.
201cFrom the medical consultations, the common illnesses of the residents here are common colds, respiratory sickness and hyperacidity,201d said HSO director Dr.
Augusto Guitarte, who led the team of medical and dental professionals during the event.
Health services
201cWe identified Talongan Village through the help of KKP-SIO Kristohanong Katilingban sa Pagpakabana 2013 Social Involvement Office because this is their adopted community, so we decided to hold the medical mission here,201d Guitarte added.
Talongan village is a remote area in Sitio Calaanan, Barangay Canitoan with roughly 200 residents who were evacuees from the riverside communities of Cagayan de Oro City ravaged by Typhoon Sendong in December 2011.
The quadruplex houses in the said village were built through the resettlement program of Habitat for Humanity Philippines.

More than 200 residents of Talongan and its neighboring villages availed of the medical consultations while the XU dentists performed tooth extraction to over a hundred people, mostly teenagers.
201cThank you sa pag-anhi sa Talongan maski layo kaayo para mag-medical mission,201d said Therese Ipanag, president of the Talongan Village Homeowners Association.

"Timing ang event kay daghan gadaot kay tungod sa kalit-kalit nga init ug ulan ," she added.
The preparations for the actual medical mission started at 5 in the morning as volunteers needed to prepare the food for the feeding program and to set up the tents, tables and chairs.
Teamwork and leadership
The mission drew together 19 XU student volunteers who made sure everything was in place and in order, especially for the residents who came in the midst of the scorching heat.
Aside from manning the different booths, from registration to consultation and anesthetic areas and pharmacy, a group of Red Cross Youth members discussed the importance of hand washing, tooth brushing and proper hygiene routine among the kids from the sitio.
For the Talongan youth and parents, the volunteers also tackled rabies prevention, HIV/Aids, family planning programs and first aid, among other topics.
201cWorking with co-students was a challenge,201d shared Swetzel Anne Neri, Red Cross Youth project leader for this medical mission.
201cAll of us have our own schedules and we come from different colleges.201d
201cLisod itipok ,201d she said.
201cBut in the end, the will to pursue the project drove us to find the time.201d
201cCommunication was our best asset.
No matter how big the dilemma was during the preparation, it was handled gracefully because of our mutual understanding and teamwork,201d imparted Neri, a junior biology student at XU.
201cWe were a team; we were all leaders in the project.
Maybe I was the one who did the paperwork but everyone had their own share of work to do.
It was a blessing to be able to work with great minds.201d
XU-HSO and Red Cross Youth thank J&A Construction and Supply, Club XS and Cagayan RSO Hardware Inc.
for making the medical mission possible.
The two organizations plan to conduct a medical mission as their major project annually for different communities in the city in great need of medical attention.

Southern Leyte author weaves story about legendary talent, destiny in new novel, Southern Leyte author weaves story about legendary talent, destiny in new novelSOUTHERN LEYTE -- Author Clayton Hamlin announces the nationwide release of his new romance, adventure novel, 201cThe Prodigy.201d Both paperback and hardback editions of his book will be released this week.
201cThe Prodigy201d begins in the city of London, England, during the winter of 1665, when Christopher Clark, a young musical genius, is tragically orphaned and forced into the streets on his own.
He somehow survives, and in the adventurous years ahead, travels far, learns much, and someday finds family, true love and his amazing musical talent that would become the stuff of legends.
In 201cThe Prodigy,201d readers will be enthralled with the captivating story of a talented young boy who inherits a supernatural manifestation that he does not understand; a beautiful young girl; and a powerful destiny that awaits them both as their lives interweave.
  
Published by Tate Publishing and Enterprises, the books are available through bookstores nationwide, from the publisher at www.tatepublishing.com/bookstore, or by visiting barnesandnoble.com or amazon.com.
Hamlin was born in Prescott, Arizona, but as a young child, his family relocated to Southern Indiana where he was raised.
Growing up in rural Indiana, Hamlin was always fond of the outdoors, enjoying hiking, camping and fishing in his spare time.
During Hamlin2019s four years in the US Air Force, and another four years in the US Navy, Hamlin got a chance to travel and see much of the world.
The author now resides with his wife, Grace, in their home by the sea in Southern Leyte, Philippines.

For more information, contact Michelle Whitman, publicist, at  458-5642 or send an e-mail to michelle@keymgc.com.

Autodesk 2016 Design & Creation Suites to help boost PH design-related industries, Autodesk 2016 Design & Creation Suites to help boost PH design-related industriesConnected desktop and cloud experience tailored by industry for local designers, engineers, visual artists
, AUTODESK, Inc.
 recently announced the release of the new Autodesk 2016 Design Suites that offer more control than ever overall aspects of the design-to-make process through a connected desktop and cloud user experience.
Autodesk design and creation suites provide customers with expanded toolsets, unique interoperability and a consistent user experience.
201cOur customers are pushing the boundaries on how products are designed and made, how buildings are built, and how entertainment is created,201d said Amar Hanspal, senior vice president at Autodesk.
201cAutodesk Suites address the entire workflow: from capturing reality and iterating on a design, to physically making that design through 3D printing or other forms of fabrication.201d
Autodesk Philippines Country Manager Teddy D.
Tiu, on the other hand, explains how this development is instrumental for local industry players.
201cPhilippine design-related industries 2013 especially within the architecture, engineering and construction, manufacturing, and media and entertainment sectors 2014 have consistently flourished over the years,201d Tiu explained.
201cWith the release of our new roster of cutting edge design tools, we are optimistic that these industries will excel in a whole new different level, especially as we prepare for the ASEAN Economic Community.201d
Each suite includes AutoCAD 2016, ReCap and 3ds Max.
 AutoCAD 2016, the most advanced AutoCAD yet, that delivers faster, more precise detailed design and documentation with rich visual accuracy.
Autodesk2019s ReCap technology, also included in every suite, continues to bring Reality Computing to a new level of accessibility and affordability across the Suites with the additions of more native laser scan formats, smart measurement tools, advanced annotation and sync capabilities and more.
 Autodesk 3ds Max provides customers with the 3D tools they need to create inspirational experiences no matter what their industry demands.
Sophisticated Tools for Industry-Specific Challenges
Design professionals in the architecture, engineering and construction  and natural resources & infrastructure industries can look forward to enhanced software capabilities, increasingly powerful cloud services and flexible subscriptions options, in addition to the following enhancements:
* Building Design Suite offers improved software performance and better interoperability for visualization, clash detection and detailing.
* Infrastructure Design Suite features connected workflows between preliminary engineering and the detailed design phases, better collaboration with extended data exchange capabilities, enhanced project organization tools and improved software coordination with consistent user interfaces.
* Plant Design Suite introduces significant enhancements to AutoCAD Plant 3D including tight integration with Autodesk Vault and attachment of Navisworks models as reference models while modeling, plus inclusion of AutoCAD MEP to model electrical raceways and ductwork.
The manufacturing industry offerings provide the most comprehensive technology to design, engineer and fabricate products with new and enhanced capabilities for modeling, simulation and fabrication.
The company is debuting new Autodesk AnyCAD interoperability for any third-party design files, and Autodesk 3D Print Studio, based on the Spark open 3D printing platform, which directly integrates additive fabrication into the Suites workflow.

* Product Design Suite: In addition to AnyCAD and 3D Print Studio, 2016 provides enhancements for visualization, electromechanical design, data management, advanced simulation and includes subscription access to the cloud-based Autodesk Fusion 360.

* Factory Design Suite:  Numerous enhancements have been added for converting CAD assets from 2D to 3D with improved accuracy and efficiency, and factory customers will experience an improved workflow for integrating point cloud data from laser scans.
Digital artists, film makers and gamers will find Autodesk tools helping to address the entire production process, especially when collaborating with multi-discipline teams spread across multiple locations.
* Entertainment Creation Suite: Major enhancements focus on animation performance, ease of use, content creation, collaborative and connected workflows and ease of use.
2016 Subscriber Benefits
Autodesk continues to innovate and improve its Suites and Desktop Subscription products to tightly integrate with Autodesk 360 cloud services.
Subscription customers gain access to additional cloud services such as faster rendering and visualization capabilities, simulation, analysis and collaboration tools.
Customers will also experience the new Autodesk Account, a personalized and easy-to-use portal where customers can track and manage all Autodesk products, services, and benefits in one place.
Customers will experience a simplified installation, management and upgrade experience, flexible payment terms, and broader access rights across multiple devices.

Availability
Autodesk 2016 Design Suites are already available in the ASEAN region.
See details and purchasing options at http://www.autodesk.com/subscription.

